=== Page 1 ===
Review Paper
 
Interactions and incompatibilities of pharmaceutical excipients
with active pharmaceutical ingredients: a comprehensive
review.
Sonali S. Bharate, Sandip B. Bharate and Amrita N. Bajaj
a*
b 
c
P.E. Society’s Modern College of Pharmacy (For Ladies), Borhadewadi, At/Post- Moshi, Tal-Haweli, Dist- Pune, Maharashtra –
a
412105, India
STES’s Sinhgad College of Pharmacy, Off Sinhgad Road, Vadgaon (Budruk), Pune-411041, India
b
C.U. Shah College of Pharmacy, S.N.D.T. Women’s University, Juhu Tara Road, Santacruz (E), Mumbai, Maharashtra-400049, India
c
Received: 05 March 2010; Accepted: 03 November 2010
ABSTRACT
Studies of active drug/excipient compatibility represent an important phase in the preformulation
stage of the development of all dosage forms. The potential physical and chemical interactions
between drugs and excipients can affect the chemical nature, the stability and bioavailability of drugs
and, consequently, their therapeutic efficacy and safety. The present review covers the literature
reports of interaction and incompatibilities of commonly used pharmaceutical excipients with
different active pharmaceutical ingredients in solid dosage forms. Examples of active drug/excipient
interactions, such as transacylation, the Maillard browning reaction, acid base reactions and physical
changes are discussed for different active pharmaceutical ingredients belonging to different thera-
peutic categories viz antiviral, anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic, antihypertensive, anti-convulsant, an-
tibiotic, bronchodialator, antimalarial, antiemetic, antiamoebic, antipsychotic, antidepressant, anti-
cancer, anticoagulant and sedative/hypnotic drugs and vitamins. Once the solid-state reactions of a
pharmaceutical system are understood, the necessary steps can be taken to avoid reactivity and imp-
rove the stability of drug substances and products.
KEY WORDS: Incompatibility, interaction, active pharmaceutical ingredient, excipients, lactose, magnesium stearate
INTRODUCTION
Preformulation is the first step in the rational
formulation of an active pharmaceutical
ingredient (API). It is an investigation of the
physical-chemical properties of the drug subs-
tance, alone and in combination with
excipients. Assessment of possible incom-
patibilities between the drug and different
excipients is an important part of pre-
formulation. The formulation of a drug subs-
tance frequently involves it being blended with
different excipients to improve manufac-
turability, and to maximize the product’s ability
to administer the drug dose effectively.
Excipients 
are 
known 
to 
facilitate
administration and modulate release of the
active component. They can also stabilize it
against degradation from the environment.
Corresponding author: Dr. Sonali S. Bharate, Assistant Professor, P.E.
*
Society’s Modern College of Pharmacy (For Ladies), Borhadewadi,
At/Post- Moshi, Tal- Haweli, Dist- Pune, Maharashtra – 412105, India, 
Email: sonalibharate@gmail.com
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 3

=== Page 2 ===
Review Paper
Most excipients have no direct pharmacological
action but they can impart useful properties to
the formulation. However, they can also give
rise to inadvertent and/or unintended effects
such as increased degradation of the drug.
Physical and chemical interactions between
drugs and excipients can affect the chemical
nature, the stability and bioavailability of drug
products, and consequently, their therapeutic
efficacy and safety (1). 
There have been several approaches proposed
that satisfy the requirements of a drug-excipient
chemical compatibility screen. The most
resource sparing of these approaches is
computational, where drug-excipient chemical
compatibility can be predicted. This requires a
comprehensive database of reactive functional
groups for both drugs and excipients, com-
bined with an in-depth knowledge of excipients
and their potential impurities. Such an app-
roach provides a rapid analysis and requires no
bulk substance. However, there are inherent
risks with using this computational approach as
the sole source of information.
Binary mixture compatibility testing is another
commonly used method. In this approach,
binary (1:1 or customized) mixtures of the drug
and excipient, with or without, added water and
sometimes compacted or prepared as slurries,
are stored under stressed conditions (also
known as isothermal stress testing (IST)) and
analyzed using a stability-indicating method,
e.g. high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). The water slurry approach allows the
pH of the drug-excipient blend and the role of
moisture to be investigated. Alternatively,
binary mixtures can be screened using other
thermal methods, such as differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) (2, 3). DSC is currently the
leading technique in this field (4). The main
benefit of DSC, rather than stressed storage
methods, is its ability to quickly screen potential
excipients for incompatibilities derived from
the appearance, shifts or disappearances of
peaks and/or variations in the corresponding 
ÄH (enthalpy of transition) (5). Other features
such as low sample consumption also makes it
an attractive method. Although DSC is
unquestionably a valuable technique, interpret-
nation of the data may not be straightforward.
In this method, the sample is exposed to high
temperatures (up to 300°C or more), which in
reality is not experienced by the dosage form.
Thus, DSC results should be interpreted
carefully, as the conclusions based on DSC
results alone can be often misleading and in-
conclusive. Therefore results obtained with
DSC should always be confirmed with IST.
IST involves storage of drug-excipient blends
with, or without moisture, at elevated tem-
pertures for a specific period of time (typically
3–4 weeks) to accelerate drug degradation and
interaction with excipients. The samples are
then visually observed for any changes in color
or physical characteristics, and the drug
content, along with any degradants, is deter-
mined quantitatively (6). Although more useful,
the disadvantage with this method is that it is
time consuming and requires quantitative
analysis using e.g. HPLC. Ideally, both tech-
piques, DSC and IST should be used in
combination for the selection of excipients.
Similarly, isothermal micro calorimetry is a po-
pular method for detecting changes in the solid
state of drug-excipient mixtures through
changes in heat flux (7). The results from using
thermal techniques can be indicative of whet-
her formulations are stable, but reveal no
information concerning the cause or nature of
any incompatibility. Techniques such as hot
stage microscopy and scanning electron
microscopy can be used in conjunction with
DSC to determine the nature of an apparent
incompatibility (8). These techniques study the
morphology of the drug substance and can
determine 
the 
nature 
of 
physical
transformations, thus indicating the type of
incompatibility that has occurred (4). A more
definitive result would be obtained using e.g.
HPLC or HPLC-MS/MS. It is well known that
the chemical compatibility of an API in a binary
mixture may differ from that of a multi-
component prototype formulation. An alterna-
tive is to test “prototype” formulations. The
amount of API in the blend can be modified
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 4

=== Page 3 ===
Review Paper
according to the anticipated drug-excipient
ratio in the final compression blend (9).
There are several examples of formulation
instability resulting from solid–solid interac-
tions (10, 11). Certain classes of compounds are
known to be incompatible with particular
excipients (12). Therefore knowledge of the
chemistry of the drug substance and excipients
can often minimize formulation surprises. Heat
and water are the primary catalysts for drug-
excipient interactions and play a critical role in
the degradation of a drug substance (13). The
majority of ‘small molecule’ API instability
reactions occur via hydrolysis, oxidation and
Maillard reaction. The moisture content of the
drug and excipients plays a critical role in their
incompatibility. Heat and moisture accelerate
most reactions, even if moisture is not involved
in the reaction scheme, since moisture brings
molecules closer together, and heat always
increases the reaction rate. The incompatibility
between a drug and an excipient per se, and that
which occurs between a drug and moisture/
water activity due to the ability of the excipient
to absorb moisture, represents two different
kinds of incompatibilities. Excipients such as
starch and povidone may possess a high water
content (the equilibrium moisture content of
povidone is about 28% at 75% relative humi-
dity), which can increase drug degradation. The
moisture level will affect the stability depending
on how strongly it is bound and whether it can
come into contact with the drug (14). It is
generally recognized that aspirin is incom-
patible with magnesium salts. Higher moisture
contents and humidity 
accelerate the
degradation even further (14). Many different
moisture mediated degradation mechanisms
exist, but those mediated by surface moisture
appear to be the most common (15).
Consequently it is important that stress met-
hods incorporate water to encourage the for-
mation of all possible impurities. The way in
which water facilitates degradation is not fully
understood, but work carried out by Kontny
et al. (15) has confirmed its importance. Degra-
dation problems can, therefore, be difficult to
avoid because water often cannot be entirely
excluded from drug product formulations.
Many excipients are hygroscopic, (16, 17) and
absorb water during manufacturing, for
example during wet granulation. Depending on
the degree of hydrolytic susceptibility, different
approaches to tablet granulation can be used to
minimize hydrolysis. For compounds such as
acetylsalicylic acid that are readily hydrolysable,
direct compression or dry granulation is pre-
ferable, to wet granulation. However drug-
excipient incompatibility may still occur.
Chemical interaction between the drug and
excipients may lead to increased decom-
position. Stearate salts (e.g. magnesium stearate,
sodium stearate) should be avoided as tablet
lubricants if the API is subject to hydrolysis via
ion-catalyzed degradation. Excipients generally
contain more free moisture than the drug
substance (16), and in an attempt to obtain the
most thermodynamically stable state, water is
able to equilibrate between the various compo-
nents (18). Formulation can, therefore, poten-
tially expose the drug substance to higher levels
of moisture than normal, which greatly
increases the possibility of even stable com-
pounds degrading. In selecting excipients, it is
probably best to avoid hygroscopic excipients
when formulating hydrolytically labile com-
pounds, although examples exist where the
drug is deliberately formulated with over-dried
hygroscopic excipients (e.g. Starch 1500) which
act as a moisture scavenger to prevent the drug
from coming into contact with water.
One of the most effective ways to stabilize a
pH sensitive drug is through the adjustment of
the microscopic pH of the formulation. Ex-
cipients with high pH stability and buffering
agents are recommended. Humidity is another
major determinant of product stability in solid
dosage forms. Elevation of relative humidity
usually decreases the stability, particularly for
drugs that are highly sensitive to hydrolysis. For
example, nitrazepam in the solid state showed a
linear relationship between the logarithm of the
rate constant for the decomposition of the drug
at different relative humidities (19). In addition,
increased humidity can also accelerate the
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 5

=== Page 4 ===
Review Paper
degradation process by facilitating interaction
with excipients (20, 21). Molecular mobility is
also responsible for solid-solid reactions (22-
24). Systems with enhanced mobility have more
reactivity. Mechanical stress is also expected to
accelerate such reactions by creating a larger
surface area, increasing the number of defects,
and increasing the amount of amorphous
material (10).
Oxidation reactions are complex and it can be
difficult to understand the reaction mechanism.
The best approach is to avoid excipients
containing oxidative reactants such as peroxides
and fumed metal oxides like fumed silica and
fumed titanium dioxide. Excipients such as
povidone and polyethylene glycols (PEGs) may
contain organic peroxides as synthetic by-
products which are typically more reactive than
hydrogen peroxide. Although most compendial
excipients have limits on metals, free ethylene
oxide or other oxidizing agents via the peroxide
or iodine value there are still some instances of
oxidative degradation of drug due to presence
of reactive peroxides in excipients such as
povidone. For example, Hartauer et al. (2000)
reported oxidative degradation of Raloxifene
H.L. occurring via peroxide impurities in
povidone (25). Thus, it is important to under-
stand the purity and composition of the
excipient prior to formulation.
Aldehyde-amine addition is another important
type of reaction, which is responsible for
incompatibility between excipients comprising
reducing sugars (e.g. lactose, dextrose) and
amine-containing drugs. Aldehyde-amine addi-
tion leads to the formation of a Schiff base,
which further cyclizes to form a glycosamine
followed by an Amadori rearrangement (26,
27). This sequence of reactions is called the
Maillard reaction, and is responsible for a large
number of incompatibilities between APIs and
excipients. 
Monkhouse (28) listed common solid-state
incompatibilities as shown in Table 1.
Table 1 List of common solid-state incompatibilities 
Functional Group 
(Example of API)
Incompatible with
Type of Reaction
Reference
Primary amine (e.g.
Acyclovir)
Mono and disaccharides
(e.g. lactose)
Maillard reaction
(26, 29)
Esters (e.g.
Moexipril)
Basic components (e.g.
magnesium hydroxide)
Ester hydrolysis
(30)
Lactone (e.g.
Irinotecan HCl)
Basic components (e.g.
magnesium hydroxide)
Ring opening
(hydrolysis)
(31)
Carboxyl
Bases
Salt formation
(28, 32)
Alcohol (e.g.
Morphine)
Oxygen
Oxidation to
aldehydes and
ketones
(33, 34)
Sulfhydryl (e.g.
Captopril)
Oxygen
Dimerization
(33, 34)
Phenol
Metals, polyplasdone
Complexation
(28, 32)
Gelatin 
Cationic surfactants
Denaturation
(28, 32)
This present review discusses incompatibilities
of ‘small molecule’ API’s associated with
different pharmaceutical excipients as sum-
marized in Table 2. Incompatibilities of APIs
with different pharmaceutical excipients are
discussed below in subsequent sections relating
to excipient types as follows: Saccharides, Stea-
rates, Polyvinylpyrrolidone, Dicalcium phos-
phate dihydrate, Eudragit polymers, Celluloses,
Polyethylene glycol, Polysorbate 80, Sodium
lauryl sulfate, Chitosan, Magnesium oxide, Sili-
con dioxide, Carbonates, and Miscellaneous. 
Saccharides 
Lactose is perhaps one of the most commonly
used excipients in pharmaceutical oral dosage
forms (tablets) and, is in its crystalline form,
generally considered to be least reactive. Blaug
and Huang (99) reported that, crystalline
lactose, rather than, amorphous lactose caused
a problem in interaction of dextroamphetamine
sulfate with spray dried lactose. Lactose is a
reducing disaccharide and reactions between it
and drugs containing amino groups have been
reported. This interaction is shown in Figure 1.
This sequence of such reaction is referred to as
the Maillard reaction (26). 
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 6

=== Page 5 ===
Review Paper
Table 2 A list of excipients and their incompatibilities with API’s belonging to different therapeutic classes
Excipient
API and its Therapeutic Class
Saccharides
(A)
Lactose
Acyclovir (29) - Antiviral; Aceclofenac (35) and Ketoprofen (36-38) - Anti-inflammatory; Metformin (29)-
Antidiabetic; Amlodipine (39), Ceronapril (40), Lisinopril (41) and Oxprenolol (42) - Antihypertensive; Fluconazole
(43) - Antifungal; Primaquine (44) - Antimalarial; Promethazine (45) - Antiemetic; Fluoxetine (46) and Seproxetine
Maleate (47) – Antidepressant; Picotamide (48) – Anticoagulant; Etamsylate (43) - Antihemorrhagic; Aminophylline
(49) and Clenbuterol (50) – Bronchodialator; Baclofen (51)- CNS Drug; Ranitidine (52) – GI Agent; Doxylamine (53)
– Antihistaminic; Thiaminechloride HCL (54) – Vitamin; Pefloxacin (55) - Antibiotic
(B)
Lactose/meglumine/ Tris Buffer Blend
Glipizide (56) - Antidiabetic
(C)
Mannitol, Pearlitol (80% Mannitol +20
% Maize Starch)
Quinapril (9)- Antihypertensive; Primaquine (44)- Antimalarial; R-omeprazole (57) – GI Agent; Promethazine (45) –
Antiemetic 
(D)
Starch
Seproxetine Maleate (47) – Antidepressant; Clenbuterol (50) - Bronchodialator
(E)
Sodium Starch Glicollate
Clenbuterol (50) - Bronchodialator
(F)
Dextrose
Pefloxacin (55) - Antibiotic
Stearates
(A)
Magnesium Stearate
Acyclovir (58) – Antiviral; Aspirin (59-62), Ibuproxam (8), Indomethacin (63, 64) and Ketoprofen (36-38)- Anti-
inflammatory; Glipizide (56), Chlorpropamide (65), Glimepiride (66) and Glibenclamide (67) - Antidiabetic; 
Captopril (68, 69), Fosinopril (40), Moexipril (10, 30, 70), Oxprenolol (42) and Quinapril (9) - Antihypertensive;
Cephalexin (71), Erythromycin (72), Nalidixic Acid (73), Oxacillin (74) and Penicillin G (74) - Antibiotic; Primaquine
(44)- Antimalarial; Promethazine (45)- Antiemetic; Albendazole (75) - Antiamoebic; â-lapachone (76)- Anticancer;
Clopidogrel (77)- Anticoagulant; Doxylamine (53) – Antihistaminic; Temazepam (42) - Hypnotic
(B)
Stearic Acid
Doxylamine (53)- Antihistaminic
Polyvinyl Pyrolidone (PVP)
Indomethacin (63, 64), Ibuproxam (8) and Ketoprofen (36-38) – Anti-inflammatory; Atenolol (63) and Oxprenolol
(42)- Antihypertensive; Sulfathiazole (78) – Antibiotic; Haloperidol (79)- Antipsychotic; Ranitidine (52)- GI Agent;
Doxylamine (53)- Antihistaminic; Temazepam (42)- Hypnotic; Clenbuterol (50) – Bronchodialator
Dicalcium Phosphate Dihydrate
(DCPD)
Ceronapril (40), Oxprenolol (42) and Quinapril (9)- Antihypertensive; Metronidazole (80) – Antiamoebic; â-
lapachone (76) and Parthenolide (81)- Anticancer; Famotidine (82)- GI Agent; Temazepam (42) - Hypnotic
Eudragit Polym ers
(A)
Eudragit RS and Rl
Diflunisal (83, 84), Flurbiprofen (83, 84) and Piroxicam (83, 84) – Anti-inflammatory
(B)
Eudragit RL100
Ibuprofen (85) (86)– Anti-inflammatory
(C)
Eudragit E100
Ranitidine (52) – GI Agent
Celluloses
(A)
Microcrystalline Cellulose (MCC),
Avicel PH 101
Enalapril (87, 88) – Antihypertensive; Isosorbide Mononitrate (6) – Antiangina; Clenbuterol (50) - Bronchodialator
(B)
Cellulose Acetate
Isosorbide Mononitrate (6)- Antiangina
(C)
Hypromellose Acetate Succinate
(HPMCAS)
Dyphylline (89) - Bronchodialator
(D)
Hydroxypropyl Cellulose
Trichlormethiazide (90) - Diuretic
PEG
Ibuprofen (91), Ibuproxam (8) and Ketoprofen (36-38)– Anti-inflammatory; Phosphomycin (92) - Antibiotic;
Clopidogrel (77)- Anticoagulant
Polysorbate 80
Ibuprofen (91) – Anti-inflammatory
Sodium Lauryl Sulfate
Chlorpropamide (65) – Antidiabetic; Clopidogrel (77)– Anticoagulant; Chlordiazepoxide (11, 93) – Hypnotic
Chitosan
Diclofenac (11, 94) and Piroxicam (95)– Anti-inflammatory
Magnesium Oxide
Ibuprofen (96) – Anti-inflammatory
Silicon Dioxide
Enalapril (87, 88) - Antihypertensive
Carbonates
(A)
Sodium Carbonate
Adefovir Dipivoxil (97) - Antiviral
(B)
Sodium Bicarbonate
Ibuprofen (96) – Anti-inflammatory
Miscellaneous
(A) Plasdone
Glimepiride (66) - antidiabetic
(B) Ascorbic acid
Atenolol (63) – antihypertensive
(C) Citric acid
Atenolol (63)- antihypertensive
(D) Butylated hydroxyanisole
Atenolol (63)- antihypertensive
(E) Succinic acid
Phosphomycin (92)- antibiotic
(F) Na dioctylsulfocuccinate
Phosphomycin (92) - antibiotic
(G) Ca and Mg salts
Tetracyclins (98) - Antibiotic
(H) Talc
Seproxetine maleate (47) - antidepressant
(i). Precirol ATO 5
Temazepam (42)- hypnotic
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 7

=== Page 6 ===
Review Paper
There are a number of reports of the incom-
patibility of lactose with amine-containing
APIs. DSC and FT-IR studies showed that
aminophylline, a bronchodilator drug consisting
of a purine ring system coupled with an
ethylenediamine moiety was incompatible with
lactose. Brown discoloration appeared in
samples containing 1:5 (w/w) mixtures of
aminophylline and lactose following three
weeks of storage at 60°C (100). Another group
of researchers also reported similar findings
from stability experiments using aminophylline
combined with four tablet excipients (cellulose
starch, glucose (dextrose) and lactose) stored at
5°C, room temperature (27 ± 3°C), 45°C and in
direct sunlight for 30 days. Degradation of the
drug increased with increase in temperature and
on exposure to sunlight. The degradation was
particularly intense in the presence of glucose
and lactose and a change in color from white to
yellow occurred in such mixtures. At 45°C and
in sunlight both pure drug and its mixtures
changed color during the storage period (49).
Seproxetine, a selective serotonin re-uptake
inhibitor, is a primary amine and an active
metabolite of fluoxetine. Its maleate hemi-
hydrate salt demonstrated an incompatibility
with lactose and starch in a gelatin capsule
dosage form. Analogous to a Micheal addition,
there is a formation of 1-4 addition product
between the drug and the maleic acid facilitated
by the free moisture associated with the starch.
Formation of the 1,4-addition product was
noticed in the presence of pregelatinized starch
while a Maillard reaction product was formed
by interaction of the drug with lactose as shown
in Figure 1 (47). The schematic of the interac-
tion between saproxetine and maleic acid in the
presence of starch is shown in Figure 2. An
ACE inhibitor, ceronapril containing a primary
amine function, also exhibited incompatibility
with lactose due to a Maillard reaction. HPLC
studies of mixtures of ceronapril with lactose
after 3 weeks storage at 50ºC showed that the
ceronapril had degraded by 8.4% (40).
Amlodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium chan-
nel blocker containing a primary amine group.
It was found to be unstable in a multi-
component mixture with lactose, magnesium
stearate and water. Amlodipine besylate glyco-
syl was identified as a major reason for
degradation due to a Maillard reaction between
the drug and lactose (39). Metformin is a bigua-
nide class of antidiabetic drug also containing a
primary amine group. Binary mixtures of met-
formin with starch and lactose showed interac-
tion upon heating, changing the melting
temperature of metformin and the accom-
panying enthalpy. A change in the melting
temperature of metformin was observed for all
mixtures tested i.e. metformin: starch ratios of
2:8; 3:7; 1:1; 7:3 and 8:2. The melting peak for
metformin was not visible in the presence of
lactose suggesting an interaction between them.
Displacement of the melting temperature of
metformin, for all the metformin–starch mix-
tures tested, confirmed the interaction between
the two materials. One possible reason for this
interaction can be a Maillard reaction between
Figure 1 A general Maillard reaction between lactose
and an amine group-containing API
Figure 2 Interaction between Seproxetine and maleic
acid in the presence of starch (47).
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 8

=== Page 7 ===
Review Paper
the lactose carbonyl that can react with an
amine group of metformin (101). Acyclovir is a
purine class of antiviral drug, again, containing
a primary amine group. Results of DSC studies
of physical mixtures of the drug with lactose
suggested an incompatibility, confirmed by li-
quid chromatography coupled with mass spect-
rometry (LC-MS) which identified the for-
mation of a Maillard reaction as shown in
Figure 1 (29).
Baclofen is a primary amine used in treatment
of spastic movement disorders. Using LC-MS
studies showed that it was incompatible with
lactose as indicated by the formation of a Mail-
lard reaction product. Fourier transform infra-
red spectroscopic analysis (FTIR) showed the
formation of the imine bond, which indicated
that baclofen, undergoes a Maillard-type reac-
tion with lactose (51).
Lactose monohydrate also interacted with
moisture sensitive drugs and affected the stabi-
lity of the drug (102). A mixture of thiamine
hydrochloride and lactose underwent the Mail-
lard reaction forming the N-glycosylamine,
which was further converted to the amino
ketone via an Amadori rearrangement. The
configuration of an á-(spray-dried) lactose and
â-anhydrous lactose was not relevant for the
Maillard reaction because the reaction of
lactose is believed to occur through an open-
chain form. Spray dried lactose also contains
amorphous lactose which is important for
reactivity (99). Similar changes in spectra were
noticed for binary mixtures of both forms of
lactose with thiamine hydrochloride. A change
of tablet color due to the degradation of drug
under accelerated conditions was observed (54).
Although primary amines are the most
commonly reported substrates for the Maillard
reaction, there are also reports of Maillard
reactions with secondary amines. Oxprenolol
hydrochloride (42), fluoxetine hydrochloride
(46), etamsylate (43), ranitidine (52) and aceclo-
fenac (35) are examples. Etamsylate is 2,5-di-
hydroxybenzene sulfonic acid containing an N-
ethylethanamine group. The DSC thermograms
of the mixtures of etamsylate and lactose sho-
wed additional peaks, in addition to those
recorded for the individual components. In the
case of the etamsylate–lactose mixture an
additional prominent endotherm appeared at
118.5°C. The main peak at 136.7°C in the
original etamsylate thermogram shifted to a
lower temperature of 131.4°C. This was pro-
bably due to solid solubility of lactose in
etamsylate (43).
Ranitidine HCl is a drug used for the treatment
of gastric ulcer. The drug is a secondary amine.
An incompatibility was reported in a 1:1 binary
mixture of the drug and lactose. The DSC
thermogram of lactose monohydrate showed a
dehydration peak at 150°C followed by an
endothermic melting peak at 222°C. However,
the thermogram of the binary mixture showed a
broader peak at 150°C and the disappearance
of the melting peak of lactose at 222°C,
indicating a possible interaction between
ranitidine and lactose (52). Aceclofenac is a
Non-Steroidal 
Anti-inflammatory 
drug
(NSAID) with a secondary amine group. It
showed an incompatibility with spray-dried
lactose (SDL). In the binary mixture of
aceclofenac and SDL (7:3), an IR peak at
1848.6 cm using pure aceclofenac was
-1
observed. This peak disap-peared and another
peak at 1771.5 cm shifted to 1762.8 cm . In
-1
-1
the mixture of aceclofenac and SDL at a ratio
of 6:4, peaks at 1848.6 and 1771.5 cm-1 
disappeared completely using pure aceclofenac.
A further increase in the SDL concentration
gave similar results (35).
There are also some reports of lactose
interaction with drugs not having a primary or
secondary amine group such as Fluconazole
and Pefloxacin. The mixture of fluconazole and
lactose showed additional peaks by DSC at
86.1°C and 136.4°C respectively, in addition to
the peak corresponding to the melting of pure
drug at 140.2°C. This indicates an interaction
between the drug and the excipient (43).
The antibacterial drug pefloxacin mesylate also
does not contain a primary or secondary amine
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 9

=== Page 8 ===
Review Paper
group but is reported to interact with
anhydrous dextrose, Pearlitol® (mannitol),
Lactopress SD (directly compressible lactose),
Lactochem FP [Natural L (+) Lactic Acid], and
Lycatab® (starch/calcium carbonate), as indica-
ted by the loss of the characteristic melting
endothermic peak of perfloxacin mesylate in
the DSC thermogram. The enthalpy changes in
admixtures were within a 10% limit of the
calculated enthalpy. However, the results of
isothermal stability studies did not support the
conclusions from the DSC results (55). Since
elevated temperatures in DSC study are not
necessarily relevant to ambient conditions,
isothermal stress results are more reliable.
Further, additional stability studies of prototype
formulation at accelerated conditions can be
carried out to discover any potential incom-
patibility. Another tertiary amine drug, prome-
thazine hydrochloride used as an antiemetic,
antihistamine and sedative, resulted in a brown
color in stressed binary mixture studies (stored
at 55°C for 3 weeks) indicating a potential in-
teraction with lactose monohydrate (45).
Meglumine is an amino sugar derived from
sorbitol. The incompatibility of the antidiabetic
drug glipizide with the blend of meglumine/
TRIS buffer has been reported. An interaction
was observed between meglumine and glipizide
but the mechanism has not been established. A
yellow coloration caused by the interaction of
the amine group of meglumine/TRIS buffer
and lactose was observed. Because the solubility
modifier (meglumine/TRIS buffer) was requi-
red to increase the solubility of glipizide in the
formulation, the presence of lactose in the for-
mulation was considered detrimental to long-
term stability. In addition, a melting endo-
thermic peak of glipizide was found to be mis-
sing in a glipizide–lactose mixture, which
suggested an interaction between the two com-
ponents. A sharp endothermic peak at
130.32°C was observed in the DSC thermo-
gram of meglumine, which broadened and
shifted to lower temperature (122.81°C) for a
glipizide and meglumine mixture. The drug
peak was completely absent in the DSC trace of
the mixture, which suggested a possible interac-tion.
The DSC trace of TRIS buffer showed two
endothermic peaks at 139.14ºC (probably due
to evaporation of adsorbed moisture) and
172.73°C (melting point of TRIS buffer),
followed by an endotherm at 300°C, probably
due to the decomposition of TRIS buffer. In
the thermogram of glipizide and TRIS buffer
mixture, the TRIS buffer peak at 139.14°C
shifted to a lower temperature (135.60°C). In
addition, the drug peak was missing and a
broad endothermic peak was observed at
296.16°C (56). The DSC results were indicative
of an interaction between glipizide and TRIS
buffer. However, the IR spectrum of glipizide–
TRIS buffer mixture showed the presence of
characteristic bands corresponding to glipizide.
There was no appearance of new bands. Hence,
there was strong evidence of unchanged drug
structure and lack of chemical interaction bet-
ween the two. Thus, it was concluded that there
was no chemical incompatibility between glipi-
zide and TRIS buffer.
 
The results confirmed that DSC could be used
as a rapid method to evaluate the compatibility
between a drug and excipients. However,
caution needs to be exercised while interpreting
the DSC results alone. Wherever possible,
results from other techniques such as IR and
quantitative analysis after storage under stressed
conditions, should be taken in conjunction with
DSC results to reach any definite conclusion. In
the present example, the results from the DSC
along with IR and/or HPLC were successfully
employed to assess the compatibility of glipizi-
de with the excipients used in the development
of extended release formulations. Based on the
results of IR and/or HPLC analysis, any pos-
sible pharmaceutical incompatibility between
glipizide and TRIS buffer and magnesium
stearate was ruled out. Other APIs which show
possible incompatibilities in binary mixtures
with lactose include ketoprofen (36, 37),
picotamide (48), primaquine (44), clenbuterol
(50), sennosides A and B (103) and lisinopril
(41).
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 10

=== Page 9 ===
Review Paper
Mannitol is a sugar alcohol derived from a
sugar by reduction and is a commonly used,
non-hygroscopic and chemically stable exci-
pient, with good flow properties and high
compressibility. As such, it is suitable for use
with APIs sensitive to water. It is primarily used
as a diluent (10-90%) in tablet formulations.
There have, however, been some reports of 
adverse effects of mannitol on stability of
drugs. This has been attributed to continued
crystallization of mannitol from a system that is
initially only partially crystalline. This can result
in an increase in water activity in amorphous
regions where the drug is located, with
subsequent adverse effects on stability (104).
Mannitol was found to be incompatible with
omeprazole (57), primaquine (44) and quinapril
(9). Mixing mannitol with either of the
omeprazole sodium isomers in their racemic
forms led to a decrease in the crystallinity of the
resulting mixtures. In the case of S- and R,S-
omeprazole sodium the crystallinity is lost.
Mixing of mannitol and R-omeprazole sodium
leads to the decrease in melting temperatures
and broadening the melting peaks that can be
attributed to the interaction between two
different crystalline structures. There was better
compression of the S-omeprazole–mannitol
mixture resulting in a smoother tablet surface,
compared to that of R-omeprazole–mannitol.
Significant physical interaction of R-
omeprazole with mannitol was observed from
localized thermal analysis (LTA) and DSC
results (57).
Despite of the well known interaction of
lactose with drugs that contain primary and
secondary amine groups, it continues to be one
of the most widely used diluents. Most of the
Maillard reactions may be prevented by
reducing the water activity in the formulations
and using appropriate packaging. Castello and
Mattocks (1962) reported that the Maillard
reaction occurs only in the presence of an
amine base and not in the presence of the salt.
The release of free-base from the amine salt
occurs by reaction of the alkaline lubricant, for
example magnesium stearate, which removes
hydrogen ion with the formation of stearic acid,
furnishing an alkaline medium in the adsorbed
moisture (105).
Stearates
Magnesium stearate is widely used as a lubricant
in the manufacture of pharmaceutical solid
dosage forms. Literature shows that there are
numerous reports of the incompatibility
between stearates and active pharmaceutical
ingredients. Chemical incompatibility between
aspirin and magnesium stearate results in a
number of potentially undesirable products,
such as salicylic acid, salicyl salicylic acid and
acetyl salicyl salicylic acid (106, 107). Several
theories have been suggested to explain the
mechanism of this chemical incompatibility.
Acetylsalicylic acid is a moisture-sensitive drug
(108) hence its degradation is often associated
with the presence of water (109) and/or
alkaline pH (110). Tablet mixtures containing
aspirin and drugs with easily-acetylated groups
react to give acetyl compounds and salicylic
acid. Troup and Mitchner (111) reported the
reaction of phenylephrine hydrochloride with
acetylsalicylic acid where an acetyl group is
transferred from acetylsalicylic acid to the
phenylephrine. For example, mixtures of
phenylephrine hydrochloride and aspirin
contained 80% of acetylated phenylephrine
after 34 days at 70°C. Adding starch and
magnesium stearate slowed this reaction to
about 1% in 34 days, while adding magnesium
stearate 
alone 
resulted 
in 
complete
decomposition in 16 days. In addition some
diacetylated product was produced. This
reaction may proceed by direct acetylation.
Similarly, aspirin tablets containing codeine or
acetaminophen yielded acetylated drugs when
heated (112, 113). Kornblum and Zoglio (109)
found that the rate of decomposition of
acetylsalicylic acid in suspensions with lubri-
cants, such as magnesium stearate, was asso-
ciated with the high solubility of the mag-
nesium salt of acetylsalicylic acid. This formed a
buffer with solvated acetylsalicylic acid, creating
a pH environment that was detrimental to the
stability of the compound. It has also been
suggested that the presence of MgO impurities
in magnesium stearate catalyze degradation by
creating an alkaline pH environment (59).
However, the relationship between pH and
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 11

=== Page 10 ===
Review Paper
decomposition is controversial, with some
authors claiming that pH does not play a
significant part in the solid state decomposition
(106). Other reports suggested that the main
mechanism of incompatibility was a reduction
in the melting point of acetylsalicylic acid,
which would generate a liquid layer on the
surface of the magnesium stearate particles,
thereby accelerating decomposition. The
presence of liquid films around decomposing
acetylsalicylic acid particles was demonstrated
by microscopic examination. Similarly, Miller
and York (60) described the formation of a
magnesium stearate surface film around
acetylsalicylic acid particles, suggesting that the
intimate contact between the two materials may
facilitate the lowering of the acetylsalicylic acid
melting point (61, 62). Further Gordon et al.
(85) noticed that in the presence of stearates
ibuprofen forms a eutectic which sublimates. 
Oxprenolol hydrochloride, a drug used for the
treatment of angina pectoris showed an
incompatibility in a binary mixture with
magnesium stearate. The binary mixture
showed two overlapping endothermic peaks
with onsets of transition at 85°C and 96°C. The
broad melting endotherm at 110°C to 118°C
for magnesium stearate was absent in the binary
mixture (42). Albendazole, a benzimidazole
class of anthelmintic drug showed an
incompatibility in a 1:1 binary mixture with
magnesium stearate. Exposure of the binary
mixture to heat and moisture resulted in
degradation confirmed by DSC and HPLC 
(75). Compatibility studies of the ACE inhibitor
fosinopril sodium with different excipients and
20% added water resulted in the formation of
degradation product A as shown in Figure 3.
However, in the presence of magnesium
stearate, formation of product A was acce-
lerated along with the formation of two other
degradation products B and C (Figure 3). The
structure of degradation product C appears to
be incorrectly transcribed in the original paper
(additional terminal methyl should not be
present) (40). Based on an HPLC investigation,
90% of the drug degraded in 1 week. In a
separate study, when a 1:1 mixture of fosinopril
sodium and magnesium stearate was exposed to
75% RH at 50°C, the degradation of fosinopril
sodium after 3 weeks was less than 1%. This
was because both fosinopril sodium and
magnesium stearate were non-hygroscopic,
although the interaction between them is
mediated by water. This would not be the case
in capsules and tablets where other formulation
components, such as microcrystalline cellulose,
starch, gelatin shell etc., would result in
moisture sorption (40).
The antitumor drug, b-lapachone showed an
interaction with magnesium stearate based on
FTIR studies. The disappearance of different
magnesium stearate bands at 1579.5 and 1465.7
cm from the FTIR spectra for both, stressed
!1
mixtures (samples were stored in an oven at
40ºC and 75% relative humidity in closed
containers using sodium chloride saturated
solutions for a month) and thermally stressed
mixtures (the drug, some excipients and its
mixtures were subjected to thermal stress by
heating up to 160ºC at a rate of 10ºC min )
!1
suggested the decomposition of the excipient.
Additionally, some changes were observed in
the â-lapachone bands at 2978 cm and
!1
1568 cm assigned to the aromatic C-H and C-
!1
C respectively. Heating-cooling DSC (HC-
DSC) experiments confirmed the hypothesis of
magnesium stearate degradation since the
second heating revealed only the melting peak
of â-Lapachone, which was observed at a lower
Figure 3 Interaction between Fosinopril sodium and
magensium stearate (40).
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 12

=== Page 11 ===
Review Paper
temperature and associated enthalpy and none
of the magnesium stearate thermal events were
observed. Heating to 160°C does not promote
changes in the morphology of â-Lapachone or
magnesium stearate separately but when heated
together the sample becomes black as a result
of the degradation of magnesium stearate. This
evidence of interaction suggests that magne-
sium stearate should be avoided in â-lapachone
formulations (76).
Captopril is a pyrrolidine carboxylic acid deriva-
tive used in the treatment of hypertension. It
showed surface interactions with metallic
stearates during grinding (5 min at room
temperature at 32% or 80% RH). A mixture of
captopril and each metallic stearate before and
after grinding gave different results in DSC,
thermogravimetric (TGA) and FTIR studies.
Although there was no interaction between
captopril and sodium stearate during grinding,
grinding could induce the trans cis iso-
merization of captopril in a ground mixture of
captopril–sodium stearate. There was no
evidence of solid-state interaction between
captopril and monoaluminum stearate, but
grinding appeared to accelerate the solid-state
interaction of captopril with magnesium
stearate. The solid-state interaction between
captopril and magnesium stearate was
evidenced by the shifting of the IR spectral
peak for the -COOH of the stearate moiety
from 1578 cm to 1541 cm . This was due to
-1
-1
the interaction of the -OH group in the
carboxylic acid function of captopril with
bridging coordination of the –COO group of
-
magnesium stearate via hydrogen bonding
involving water. The interaction between
captopril and magnesium stearate was stopped
at 60°C due to evaporation of water from the
ground mixture (68). Another group of re-
searchers (69) also noticed similar type of re-
sults for a captopril and magnesium stearate
mixture. The DSC thermogram of the binary
mixtures indicated a possible interaction due to
the disappearance of the characteristic captopril
fusion peak.
Chlorpropamide, a sulfonylurea antidiabetic
drug showed a possible solid-solid interaction,
but not necessarily a pharmaceutical incom-
patibility, in a binary mixture of chlorpro-
pamide with magnesium stearate. The DSC
curve of the chlorpropamide/magnesium stea-
rate mixture resulted in only one endothermic
event at 96.3–108.6°C suggesting a drug–
excipient interaction when heated. A substantial
decrease in the dissolution rate was observed
for chlorpropamide tablets containing magne-
sium stearate after 6 months of storage at
40°C/75% RH (65). The ACE inhibitor
quinapril, a tetrahydroisoquinoline carboxylic
acid, was incompatible with magnesium stearate
due to the basicity of magnesium stearate, and
because the rate of degradation was mediated
by the availability of moisture (9). DSC studies
showed that the antiviral drug, acyclovir also
interacted with magnesium stearate, as shown
by the disappearance of the characteristic acyc-
lovir fusion peak in the thermogram of the
binary mixture. X-ray powder diffraction
(XRPD) did not provide evidence of an
incompatibility between acyclovir and magne-
sium stearate, since the diffraction peaks remai-
ned unaltered in the physical mixture. The main
difference observed in the FTIR of binary
mixtures of acyclovir and stearic acid was the
significant decrease in the band attributed to
the -OH group, indicating a possible chemical
interaction between these compounds (58).
The sedative drug, doxylamine succinate, was
incompatible with magnesium stearate, stearic
acid, povidone (PVP) and lactose (53). Salt
forms of cysteine showed interaction with
magnesium stearate and other excipients such
as xylitol, sorbitol and two gum bases, Every T
Toco and Smily 2 Toco (114). Other APIs
which have been found to be incompatible with
stearates are glimepiride (66), cephalexin (71),
glipizide (56), ibuproxam (8), indomethacin (63,
64), ketoprofen (38), moexipril (10, 30, 70),
nalidixic acid (73), primaquine (44), promet-
hazine hydrochloride (45), temazepam (42),
glibenclamide (67), penicillin G (74), oxacillin
(74), clopidogrel besylate (77) and erythromycin
(72). It has been suggested that stearate salts
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 13

=== Page 12 ===
Review Paper
should be avoided as tablet lubricants if the
API is subject to ion-catalyzed degradation.
The degradative effect of alkali stearates is
inhibited in the presence of malic, hexamic and
maleic acid due to competition for the lubricant
cation between the drug and additive acid (115).
In some cases the interactions may not occur at
the typical use level of magnesium stearate
(0.25% to 0.5%). An even more important
concern is mixing time, which can directly
affect the disintegration time and dissolution of
the drug from the solid dosage form. This is a
detrimental physical interaction.
Povidone (PVP, polyvinyl pyrrolidone,
copovidone)
PVP is commonly used as a binder in tablet
formulations, as a film forming agent, and also
for forming amorphous dispersions of drugs. It
was found to be incompatibile with a wide
range of APIs. The antimicrobial drug sulfat-
hiazole interacted with PVP, the rate increasing
at higher PVP concentrations (78). In the DSC
thermogram of an oxprenolol:PVP mixture,
apart from the adsorbed water endotherm, a
second broad endotherm, followed by
degradation and/or vaporization was seen,
while the endotherm characteristic of oxpreno-
lol hydrochloride was absent indicating an
interaction (42). Evidence of an interaction
between the antihypertensive drug atenolol and
PVP showed substantial changes in the DSC
thermograms of a drug-excipient binary mix-
ture. This interaction was enhanced or
mediated by the free (unbound) water of the
PVP. Indications of interaction were greater in
the PVP-rich mixture, in the moisture treated
mixtures, and in mixtures annealed (at 70°C) in
closed containers, where relative humidity
would be expected to be higher than in open
containers. Temperature conditioning only
affected (on the atenolol melting enthalpy)
considerably after prolonged annealing in a
closed container. This effect was less than that
caused by moisture conditioning which, in
addition, also appeared to modify the crystalline
order of the atenolol (63).
A strong interaction between PVP and halo-
peridol was observed, favored by mechanical
stress and more evident in the 20:80 binary
mixture. The melting peak of the haloperidol
showed a low temperature shoulder. The onset
temperature of this shoulder corresponded to
that of the peak present in the 20:80 mixture.
The total enthalpy change was about 18%
lower than would have been expected if no
interaction had occurred between the
components (79). PVP also showed an
interaction with ibuproxam (8), indomethacin
(63, 64), ketoprofen (36-38), clenbuterol (50)
and temazepam (42). At 2% to 5% PVP may
not prove detrimental to many drugs. However,
when used at higher levels for specialized
applications such for the formation of amorp-
hous dispersions, then the interactions may be
deleterious. Since PVP is produced by free
radical polymerization of N-vinylpyrrolidone
using hydrogen peroxide as an initiator; a
commercial PVP always contain traces of
unreacted peroxides which may oxidize APIs.
Therefore for drugs where peroxide degra-
dation may be of concern (e.g. Ranitidine HCl),
the use of PVP as a binder should be avoided.
Hartauer et al. (25) reported that the presence
of povidone and crospovidone, in the tablet
formulation of raloxifene hydrochloride, led to
oxidation of the drug. The formation of the N-
oxide derivative of the drug substance was
confirmed based upon spectroscopic charac-
terization and chromatographic comparison to
the synthetic N-oxide. However, the dissolution
of Raloxifene HCl could not be achieved
without using PVP (116). Same authors also
showed that phenolic impurities in tablet
binding agents, such as povidone and disin-
tegrants such as crospovidone, can lead to
photodegradation of the drug through free
radical reactions.
Dicalcium phosphate dihydrate (DCPD,
Emcompress )
®
DCPD is commonly used a filler in tablet
formulations and as a dental polishing agent in
toothpaste that contains sodium monofluoro-
phosphate. It is one of the most common
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 14

=== Page 13 ===
Review Paper
diluents for tablets, but is susceptible to
dehydration at quite low temperatures in the
presence of water vapor, thus crucial choosing
conditions for processing and storage of the
dosage forms. It has been shown to be
incompatible with a number of acidic drugs as
well as with sodium salts of poorly water
soluble drugs due to its alkaline nature (117,
118).
Temazepam is a benzodiazepine hypnotic drug.
It is acidic in nature with pKa of 1.61 and
therefore when formulated with the basic
excipient DCPD, an interaction was observed
as indicated by DSC results (42). The
combination of the antihypertensive drug
oxprenolol hydro-chloride with DCPD showed,
apart from the characteristic oxprenolol
hydrochloride endo-therm, an extra endoderm
with an onset of 136°C indicating an interaction
(42). The ACE inhibitor ceronapril, which is
incompatible with lactose, was also found to be
incompatible with DCPD. HPLC studies of
mixtures of ceronapril with DCPD showed that
ceronapril degraded by 2.5% after 3 weeks of
storage. The degradation product formed in
presence of DCPD was identified (Figure 4)
using LC-MS and liquid chromatography
coupled with mass spectrometry/mass
spectrometry (LC-MS-MS). This product was
formed through an oxidative process which was
not predicted based on initial preformulation
testing (40).
The antitumor drug, â-lapachone is sensitive to
alkaline pH and when formulated with DCPD
was found to be incompatible. The heating–
cooling DSC results suggested that lapachone
promotes DCPD dehydration at lower tem-
peratures, at the same temperature as the
melting range of the drug. The DCPD water of
crystallization (20.9% of the DCPD weight)
partially dissolves the â-lapachone and the re-
sultant basic environment could decompose the
â-lapachone. This was verified by the second
heating which showed the broad drug melting
peak shifting to a lower temperature with a
slight associated enthalpy change, thus a pos-
sible sign of drug degradation. Accentuated
changes were also detected in the bands
corresponding to the functional groups of the
drug, in the thermally stressed mixtures (TSM),
which indicated chemical decomposition of â-
Lapachone (76).
Parthenolide, a naturally occurring furanone,
was found to be incompatible with DCPD.
This could be attributed to the alkaline nature
of DCPD (81). Other drugs which were found
to be incompatible with DCPD include famoti-
dine (82), nalidixic acid (73), quinapril (9) and
metronidazole (80).
Eudragit polymers
®
Eudragit polymers are copolymers derived
from esters of acrylic and methacrylic acid. The
physicochemical properties of the different
polymers are determined by the types of
functional groups. These polymers are available
in a range of different physical forms (aqueous
dispersion, organic solution granules and
powders) and are widely used for targeted and
controlled drug delivery. The acidic nature of
some Eugradit polymers has resulted in a
number of incompatibilities with active ingre-
dients.
Three NSAIDs, diflunisal, flurbiprofen, and
piroxicam showed interaction with Eudragit
polymers (RS100 and RL100). These re-
searchers showed that, due to the acidic nature
of Eudragit RS100 and RL100, except for
mechanical dispersion, the drugs interacted
with Eudragit matrixes by virtue of electrostatic
interactions with the ammonium groups pre-
sent in the polymer. These interactions were
stronger for drugs bearing a carboxylic moiety,
a 
thus having lower pK
values which signi-
Figure 4 Interaction between Ceronapril with
dicalcium phospate (40).
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 15

=== Page 14 ===
Review Paper
ficantly affected the drug release profile from
solid dispersions. The progressive disap-
pearance of FT-IR, X-ray, and thermotropic
drug signals in solid dispersion was more likely
related to the increasing amount of the
polymers, which exert a diluting effect on drug
signals. DSC of flurbiprofen exhibited a sharp
endothermic peak around 115°C, corres-
ponding to its melting point. The dispersion of
flurbiprofen in the Eudragit RS and, most often
in the Eudragit RL matrix, at both 1:2 and 1:5
weight ratios resulted in a complete suppression
of the drug fusion peak, suggesting a homo-
geneous solution of the drug in the polymer.
However, the mere physical dispersion of the
drug with Eudragit RS or Eudragit RL also
resulted in a modification of the thermotropic
profile. At the lower flurbiprofen-polymer ratio
a downward shift of the drug fusion peak
occurred in 2 partially superimposed peaks
(centered at 98°C and 106°C, respectively). In
the 1:5 w/w mixture, these peaks were further
reduced or even absent, giving a DSC
thermogram comparable to that of the
corresponding solid dispersion. An XRPD
analysis showed clearly that the systems pre-
pared using lower amounts of polymer still
showed the typical signals for drug crystals.
However, increasing the Eudragit RS ratio
progressively weakened their intensity (83, 84).
Ibuprofen (a NSAID) was also incompatible
with Eudragit. Physical and chemical inte-
raction with the carboxylic group of ibuprofen
occurs because of electrostatic interactions
and/or hydrogen bonding with the quaternary
ammonium groups in Eudragit RL. This
probably inhibits its uniform dispersion in the
polymer network and ultimately affects the drug
loading and ibuprofen release profile in vitro and
in vivo. Pignatello et al. (86) mixed different
chemical forms of ibuprofen (free acid, sodium
salt, and n-butyl ester) with Eudragit RL100 at
increasing weight ratios in order to investigate
the role of the carboxylic group in the interac-
tion with the Eudragit RL polymer. As the acid
form, ibuprofen crystallized within the polymer
network under the experimental conditions
when its concentration exceeded the solubility
of the drug in the polymer itself. At lower
weight ratios, the drug existed in an amorphous
or microcrystalline state, however, thoroughly
dispersed in the polymer matrix. The thermal
behavior of the solid dispersions and mixtures
suggested that the polymer inhibited the
melting of the drug crystals. A large
endothermic peak is only visible above 140°C,
probably due to the beginning of polymer
degradation. The systems containing higher
polymer ratios (33% of Eudragit RL with acid-
free form of the drug (IBU/A) and 33% of
Eudragit RL with ibuprofen sodium salt
(IBU/S) aqueous solution) showed a melting
peak at 146°C and 97.5°C, respectively. These
findings from powder X ray diffraction
(PXRD) analysis confirmed that, above a
certain concentration, the excess of drug was
not able to form a homogeneous solid solution
with the polymer. IR studies showed that,
ibuprofen exhibited a strong peak at 1720 cm-1
for carbonyl group stretching, while for its solid
dispersion a broader and weaker signal was
visible, at around 1725 cm (86).
-1
A mild interaction between the antiulcer drug
ranitidine and Eudragit E100 has been
reported. Although there was no alteration in
the DSC thermogram of the ranitidine-Eudragit
mixture, compared to those of pure compound,
careful examination of DRIFTS spectrum
(diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform
spectroscopy) of 1:1 drug-Eudragit E100
mixture revealed a slight shift to a higher wave
number of the band associated with the
3
protonated tertiary amine group R -NH of
+
ranitidine HCl at 2560 cm . This suggested a
-1
mild interaction, such as hydrogen bonding,
between protonated tertiary amine group of the
drug and a functional group on the polymer
(52). The use of acidic film formers Eudragit L
100, 
hypromellose 
acetate 
succinate
(HPMCAS-HF), Hypromellose phthalate grade
55 (HP-55), and shellac resulted in instability of
the acid-labile proton pump inhibitor
omeprazole in solid drug-polymer blends at
accelerated storage conditions (40ºC/75% RH).
HP-55 caused the highest degree of omeprazole
degra-dation, followed by shellac, HPMCAS-
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 16

=== Page 15 ===
Review Paper
HF, and then Eudragit1 L 100 (119). Despite of
the interaction of methacrylic acid co-polymers
with most drugs belonging to the proton pump
inhibitors group, the polymers are widely used
in enteric coat formulations because of their
ability to control drug release within a narrow
pH range. The incompatibility is avoided by
suitably protecting the drug using a barrier
coating. 
Celluloses
Methylcellulose is widely used in a variety of
oral and topical pharmaceutical formulations. It
is also extensively used in cosmetics and food
products. MCC is used as an inactive filler in
tablets and as a thickener and stabilizers in pro-
cessed foods. Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose
(hypromellose) has been used as an excipient in
oral tablet and capsule formulations, where,
depending on the grade, it functions as a
controlled release agent delaying the release of a
medicinal compound into the digestive tract.
Different grades can also be used as binders or
as a component of tablet coatings
It has been reported that the degradation rate
of enalapril maleate was accelerated by several
orders of magnitude in the presence of MCC.
The MCC appeared to reduce the apparent heat
of fusion of the enalapril maleate. At a heating
rate of 10°C/min, the DSC thermogram for
enalapril maleate showed two partially
superimposed endothermic events. The first
was due to melting and the second due to
thermal decomposition. This indicated that
decomposition takes place, to some extent, 
during melting. Moreover, in the DSC
thermogram for the enalapril maleate:MCC
binary mixture, there is an increase in the
degree of overlap of the two events. However,
the authors did not attempt to separate the
thermal events by decreasing the heating rate
(87). Other researchers (88) have also de-
monstrated an increase in the degradation rate
of enalapril maleate in presence of MCC using
DTA (differential thermal analysis) studies and
accelerated stability testing. Apart from MCC,
magnesium stearate, calcium phosphates and
several other common disintegrants (starch,
sodium starch glycolate, crospovidone and
croscarmellose sodium) were also shown to
contribute to the decomposition of enalapril
maleate (120).
Isosorbide mononitrate, a nitrooxy dioxa-
bicyclic compound used for treatment of an-
gina pectoris showed an interaction with
cellulose acetate and MCC as evidenced by
DSC, IST and HPLC studies. There was also a
drastic reduction in the enthalpy value (from
125.32 to 34.10 J/g), which also suggested an
incompatibility. When IST samples of an iso-
sorbide mononitrate:cellulose acetate mixture
were observed after 3 weeks of storage under
stressed conditions, a yellow coloration was
observed. The presence of a new peak in the
HPLC chromatogram of the stressed samples
of isosorbide mononitrate:cellulose acetate mix-
ture further suggested a chemical interaction
(6).
HPMCAS is a widely used excipient in solid
dispersion technology. HPMCAS potentially
undergoes hydrolysis to produce succinic acid
and acetic acid, the hydrolysis rate being higher
at higher temperatures and higher relative
humidities. The use of HPMCAS is not
recommended for APIs containing hydroxyl
group(s) due to the potential of ester formation
with succinic acid and/or acetic acid. Dyphyl-
line, a drug used to treat bronchial asthma,
consists of a purine skeleton with a 2,3-
dihydroxy-side chain. In order to test the
potential incompatibility of hydroxy group
containing APIs with HPMCAS, Dong and
Choi (89) used a dyphylline as a model drug.
Dyphylline was stored at 140°C for 5 hours in
the following three forms: (a) pure powder, (b)
physical mixture with succinic acid (50:50) and
© physical mixture with HPMCAS with a
drug–excipient ratio of 40:60 to mimic a 40%
loading HME (hot melt extrusion) compo-
sition. The samples were dissolved in a diluent
(95% pH 8.25 50 mM phosphate buffer + 5%
acetonitrile) to form a 0.1 mg/mL solution of
dyphylline for HPLC analysis. Upon heat
treatment, three degradants were observed in
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 17

=== Page 16 ===
Review Paper
the physical mixture of dyphylline and
HPMCAS. They were identified as two mono-
esters and one di-ester of two dyphylline
molecules with one succinic acid molecule
(Figure 5), suggesting potential drug–excipient
incompatibility during formulation develop-
ment (89).
The diuretic drug, trichlormethiazide was found
to be stable in a solid state under humid con-
ditions, but when made into tablets was not
stable under the same conditions. Trichlor-
methiazide degradation was accelerated by the
addition of hydroxypropylcellulose. Various
factors that could affect the trichlormethiazide
stability in tablets were considered, such as,
adsorption of water, amount of free water and
pH (90).
Polyethylene glycol (PEG)
PEG is widely used as a lubricant and as a
cosolvent/dispersant for poorly soluble drugs
in pharmaceutical dosage forms. The purity of
PEG plays a very important role in the
degradation of drugs. High purity grades
available from reputable manufacturers are less
likely to lead to degradation of drugs.
Ibuprofen showed an incompatibility with PEG
in tablets stored for three weeks at 70°C/75%
RH resulting in the formation of ibuprofen
degradation products. One of the identified de-
gradation products was a known toxin 4-
isobutylacetophenone (91). Aspirin undergoes
pseudo-first order decomposition in com-
bination with several grades of PEGs due in
part to trans-esterification to form salicyclic
acid and acetylated PEG (121). The rate of
decomposition was considerably greater when a
fatty base, such as cocoa butter, was used (122).
Analysis of commercial batches of 100 mg
indomethacin-PEG suppositories showed that
approximately 2%, 3.5% and 4.5% of the origi-
nal amount of indomethacin was esterified with
PEG 300 after storage of one, two and three
years respectively. The formation of poly-
ethylene glycol (PEG) sulfonate/ besylate esters
have been reported during hot melt granulation
of clopidogrel besylate with PEG 6000, several
of which are genotoxic (77). Other APIs which
showed interaction with PEG are ibuproxam
(8) ketoprofen (38) and calcium phosphomycin
(92). 
Polysorbate 80
Polysorbate 80, commercially known as
Tween 80, is a nonionic surfactant and
®
emulsifier used in food and pharmaceuticals.
Formation of peroxide in neat polysorbate 80
in the presence of air during incubation at
elevated temperatures has been reported. This
can affect the stability of oxidation-sensitive
drugs (123). Ibuprofen showed an incom-
patibility with polysorbate 80 in tablets stored
for three weeks at 70°C/75% RH (91).
Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS)
SLS is widely used in solid oral formulations as
a surfactant/wetting agent to improve the solu-
bility of poorly soluble drugs. Incompatibility
between the antidiabetic drug chlorpropamide
and SLS has been reported. The DSC
thermogram of a chlorpropamide/SLS mixture
showed a wide endotherm at 99-120°C with the
disappearance of the double melting peak of
the drug. A considerable decrease in the
dissolution rate of chlorpropamide from tablets
containing SLS was observed after 6 months of 
Figure 5 Interaction between hydroxypropyl
methylcellulose acetate succinate and dyphylline (89).
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 18

=== Page 17 ===
Review Paper
storage at 40°C/75% RH which clearly
suggested incompatibility between the active
drug and excipient. (65). An in vitro study found
that chlordiazepoxide, which can exist in
cationic form, formed an ion pair with the
anionic SLS, resulting in decreased membrane
permeability (11, 93). The anti-coagulant drug,
clopidogrel besylate was also found to be
incompatible with SLS (77).
Chitosan
Chitosan has been investigated as an excipient
for use in direct tablet compression, as a tablet
disintegrant, for the production of controlled
release solid dosage forms and for the
improvement of drug dissolution (124).
Chitosan inhibited the release of the NSAID
diclofenac sodium from matrix tablets at low
pH, possibly due to the formation of an ionic
complex between the diclofenac sodium and
the ionized amino groups of the cationic
polymer (11, 94). Chitosan also interacted with
piroxicam. The solubility of piroxicam and it’s
biological availability increased 10-fold when
mixed with chitosan (95).
Magnesium oxide
Magnesium oxide is used in antacids as an
active ingredient and may also be used as a pH
modifier (e.g. in Levothyroxine sodium penta-
hydrate tablets) (125). A solid–solid reaction in
1:1 and 2:1 mixtures of ibuprofen/magnesium
oxide stored at 55°C has been reported as
showed by the disappearance of ibuprofen mel-
ting endotherm in DSC curve and changes in
the infrared spectrum 
after 
reaction.
Comparison with authentic samples indicated
that Mg(diibuprofen) was the product of the
reaction (Figure 6). This reaction is greatly
influenced by moisture and the molecular
mobility of the reactants. Solid–solid reactions
of ibuprofen were also observed with basic
oxides (e.g. calcium oxide) and hydroxides (e.g.
magnesium hydroxide) (96).
Silicon dioxide (Silica)
2
In pharmaceuticals, silica (SiO ) is used as a
glidant during tablet manufacturing. Colloidal
2 
SiO
was found to noticeably decrease the
thermal stability of enalapril maleate. The
TG/DTG and DSC thermograms of the binary
2
mixtures of enalapril maleate and SiO
2
indicated that SiO results in a decrease of more
than 20°C in the onset temperature of
degradation of the drug. Therefore, the use of
2
SiO as an excipient should be avoided in
formulations containing enalapril maleate, since
it may act as a catalyst in the thermal
2
decomposition of the drug even though SiO is
usually employed at low concentrations
(typically <1% mass/mass) (120).
Carbonates
The addition of aqueous soluble carbonate
salts, such as sodium carbonate, compromised
the stability of adefovir dipivoxil in the solid
state, increasing the hydrolysis of the drug
(Figure 7). However, aqueous insoluble car-
bonates, such as calcium carbonate and mag-
nesium carbonate, enhanced the stability of
adefovir dipivoxil as compared to a control
formulation. Pivalic acid, a degradation product
of adefovir dipivoxil, was shown to accelerate
the degradation rate of adefovir dipivoxil in the
solid state. The de-stabilizing effect of this acid
on adefovir dipivoxil stability was diminished in
the presence of magnesium carbonate. Pivalic
acid also increased the rate at which adefovir
dipivoxil dimers were formed in the presence
of formaldehyde vapor. Addition of insoluble
carbonates reduced the rate of formaldehyde-
catalyzed dimerization of adefovir dipivoxil
(97). Solid–solid reactions of ibuprofen with so-
dium bicarbonate and potassium carbonate
were also observed (96).
Figure 6 Acid-base reaction of ibuprofen and
magnesium oxide (96).
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 19

=== Page 18 ===
Review Paper
Miscellaneous
Apart from API-excipient incompatibilities
discussed above, several other incompatibilities
have been reported as summarized in Table 3.
Table 3. Miscellaneous API-excipient incompatibilities
Excipient (s)
API
Reference
Ascorbic 
acid, 
citric 
acid, 
butylated
hydroxyanisole
Atenolol
(126)
a
Maize starch, pregelatinized starch,
sodium starch glycolate, Avicel PH 101 
®
Clenbuterol
(50)
Plasdone
Glimepiride
(66)
®
Palmitic acid
Ketoprofen
(38)
Methyl paraben, cetostearyl alcohol,
glyceryl monostearate
Lapachol
(127)
Methyl paraben, propyl paraben, butylated
hydroxytoluene, acetylated lanolin
Lipoic acid
(128)
2
Succinic Acid
Na –Phosphomycin
(92)
Sodium dioctylsulfosuccinate
Ca–Phosphomycin
(92)
Pearlitol SD200
®
c
Promethazine
hydrochloride
(45)
Precirol ATO 5
Temazepam
(42)
®
d
Ca and Mg salts
Tetracycline
(98)
Sodium edetate, sodium bisulfite
Hydralazine HCl
(129)
e
Talc
Saproxetine maleate
(47)
f
Vitamin E succinate-processed films
Tetrahydrocannabinol
(130)
Formation of the degradation products (N-formyl atenolol, carbamic formic anhydride
a
of atenolol, –acetyl atenolol) have been reported
Incompatibility was indicated by yellow to brown coloration or white precipitation
b
Pearlitol SD is a spray dried mannitol containing 20% maize starch
c
Precirol Ato 5 is a glyceryl palmitostearate and is used as multipurpose functional
d
excipient (lubricant, sustained release agent and/or a taste masking agent for oral dosage
forms
A yellow coloration was observed
e
The amide derivative was formed due to interaction of drug with maleic acid in the
f
presence of talc
CONCLUSION
Drug-excipient interactions/incompatibilities
are major concerns in formulation deve-
lopment. Selection of the proper excipient du-
ring preformulation studies is of prime impor-
tance. Acid-base interactions and Maillard
reactions are probably the most common API-
excipient interactions reported. The excipients
lactose and magnesium stearate are the most
widely used excipients in oral solid dosage
forms. Combined with their propensity for
reaction with certain functional groups, it is no
accident therefore, that they are involved in
higher number of incompatibilities and should
always be used with caution. Use of lactose as a
diluent should be avoided for active
pharmaceutical ingredients containing amines
due to the possibility of a Maillard reaction.
Stearate salts should be avoided as tablet
lubricants if the API is subject to hydrolytic
ion-catalyzed degradation. Alkaline excipients
such as DCPD should not be used in the
formulation of acidic drugs. The use of
Eudragit RL should be avoided with drugs
containing a carboxyl group (e.g. ibuprofen, lo-
wer pKa) since these exhibit strong electrostatic
interaction with ammonium groups present in
Eudragit polymer affecting the release profile
of the active ingredient. Care should also be
taken when formulating drugs containing
hydroxyl groups. The use of HPMCAS should
be avoided due to potential ester formation
with succinic acid or acetic acid. Although, in
many of the examples discussed above, the
incompatibility is evident at elevated tempe-
ratures or at unrealistically high concentration
ratios of excipient to API, and thus they may
not be seen at ambient (real) temperatures or at
commonly used excipient to API ratios for the
duration of the product shelf-life. However,
such information is very helpful for analyzing
any instability issues with commercial for-
mulations or during the development of new
formulations. Once solid-state reactions are
understood in a pharmaceutical system, the
necessary steps can be taken to avoid the
reactivity and improve the storage stability for
drug products.
REFERENCES
1
Rowe RC; Sheskey PJ; Quinn ME, Handbook of
Pharmaceutical 
Excipients. 
6th 
Edition 
ed.;
Pharmaceutical Press: London, 2009.
Figure 7 Hydrolysis of adefovir dipivoxil (97).
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 20

=== Page 19 ===
Review Paper
2
Clas SD; Dalton CR; Hancock BC, Differential
scanning 
calorimetry: 
applications 
in 
drug
development. Pharm. Sci. Technol. Today 2, 311-
320, 1999.
3
Giron D, Contribution of thermal methods and
related techniques to the rational development of
pharmaceuticals—Part 2. Pharm. Sci. Technol.
Today 1, 262–268, 1998.
4
Sims JL; Carreira JA; Carrier DJ; Crabtree SR;
Easton L; Hancock SA; Simcox CE, A New
approach to accelerated drug-excipient compatibility
testing. Pharm. Dev. Technol. 8, 119-126, 2003.
5
Vueba 
ML; 
Veiga 
F; 
Sousa 
JJ; 
Pina 
ME,
Compatibility 
studies 
between 
ibuprofen 
or
ketoprofen with cellulose ether polymer mixtures
using thermal analysis. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm.
31, 943-949, 2005.
6
Verma RK; Garg S, Compatibility studies between
isosorbide mononitrate and selected excipients used
in 
the 
development 
of 
extended 
release
formulations. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 35, 449-458,
2004.
7
Phipps MA; Mackin LA, Application of isothermal
microcalorimetry in solid state drug development.
Pharm. Sci. Technol. Today 3, 9-17, 2000.
8
Mura P; Faucci MT; Manderioli A; Bramanti G;
Ceccarelli 
L, 
Compatibility 
study 
between
ibuproxam and pharmaceutical excipients using
differential 
scanning 
calorimetry, 
hot-stage
microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. J.
Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 18, (151-163), 1998.
9
Thomas VH; Naath M, Design and utilization of the
drug–excipient chemical compatibility automated
system. Int. J. Pharm. 359, 150–157, 2008.
10
Byrn SR; Xu W; Newman AW, Chemical reactivity
in 
solid-state 
pharmaceuticals: 
formulation
implications. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 48, 115–136,
2001.
11
Jackson K; Young D; Pant S, Drug–excipient
interactions and their affect on absorption. PSTT 3,
(10), 336-345, 2000.
12
Monkhouse DC; Maderich A, Whither compatibility
testing? Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 15, 2115-2130,
1989.
13
Crowley PJ, Excipients as stabilizers. Pharm. Sci.
Technol. Today 2, 237-243, 1999.
14
Maulding HV; Zoglio MA; Pigois FE; Wagner M,
Pharmaceutical heterogeneous systems IV: A kinetic
approach to the stability screening of solid dosage
forms containing aspirin. J. Pharm. Sci. 58, 1359-
1362, 1969.
15
Kontny MJ; Grandolfi GP; Zografi G, Water vapor
sorption of water-soluble substances: studies of
crystalline 
solids 
below 
their 
critical 
relative
humidities. Pharm. Res. 4, 104-112, 1987.
16
Callahan JC; Cleary GW; Elefant M; Kaplan G;
Kensler T; Nash RA, Equilibrium moisture content
of pharmaceutical excipients. Drug Dev. Ind.
Pharm. 8, 355, 1982.
17
Hancock BC; Shamblin SL, Water vapor sorption by
pharmaceutical sugars. Pharm. Sci. Technol. Today
1, 345–351, 1998.
18
Kontny 
MJ, 
Distribution 
of 
water 
in 
solid
pharmaceutical systems. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 14,
1991-2027, 1988.
19
Genton D; Kesselring UW, Effect of temperature
and relative humidity on nitrazepam stability in solid
state. J. Pharm. Sci. 66, 676-680, 1977.
20
Chemburkar PB; Smyth RD; Buehler JD; Shah PB;
Joslin RS; Polk A; Reavey-Cantwell NH, Correlation
between dissolution characteristics and absorption
of methaqualone from solid dosage forms. J. Pharm.
Sci. 65, 529-533, 1976.
21
Horhota ST; Burgio J; Lonski L; Rhodes CT, Effect
of storage at specified temperature and humidity on
properties of three directly compressible tablet
formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 65, 1746-1749, 1976.
22
Byrn SR; Kessler DW, The solid-state reactivity of
the crystal forms hydrocortizone esters. Tetrahedron
43, 1335 -1343, 1987.
23
Byrn SR; Lin CT, The effect of crystal packing and
defects on desolvation of hydrate crystals of caffeine
and 
L-(2)-1,4-cyclohexadiene-1-alanine. 
J. 
Am.
Chem. Soc. 98, 4004–4005, 1976.
24
Byrn SR; Sutton PA; Tobias B; Frye J; Main P,
Crystal structure, solid-state NMR spectra, and
oxygen 
reactivity 
of 
five 
crystal 
forms 
of
prednisolone tertbutylacetate. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
110, 1609–1614, 1988.
25
Hartauer KJ; Arbuthnot GN; Baertschi SW;
Johnson RA; Luke WD; Pearson NG; Rickard EC;
Tingle CA; Tsang PKS; Wiens RE, Influence of
peroxide impurities in povidone and crospovidone
on the stability of raloxifene hydrochloride in
tablets: identification and control of an oxidative
degradation product. Pharm. Dev. Technol. 5,
303–310, 2000.
26
Maillard LC, Action of amino acids on sugars.
Formation of melanoidins in a methodical way.
Comp. Rend. 154, 66-68, 1912.
27
Buxton PC; Jahnke R; Keady S, Degradation of
glucose in the presence of electrolytes during heat
sterilization. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 40, 172-175,
1994.
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 21

=== Page 20 ===
Review Paper
28
Monkhouse DC, Excipient compatibility possibilities
and limitations in stability prediction. In Stability
testing in the EC, Japan and the USA. Scientific and
regulatory requirements, Crim W; Krummen K, Eds.
Wissenschaftlidie Verlassgellschaft mbH: Stuttgart,
1993; pp 67-74.
29
Monajjemzadeh F; Hassanzadeh D; Valizadeh H;
Siahi-Shadbad MR; Mojarrad JS; Robertson TA;
Roberts MS, Compatibility studies of acyclovir and
lactose in physical mixtures and commercial tablets.
Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 73, (3), 404-413, 2009.
30
Gu L; Strickley RG; Chi LH; Chowhan ZT, Drug-
excipient incompatibility studies of the dipeptide
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, moexipril
hydrochloride: dry powder vs wet granulation.
Pharm. Res. 7, (4), 379-83, 1990.
31
Ozdemir 
FA; 
Anilanmert 
B; 
Pekin 
M,
Spectrophotometric investigation of the chemical
compatibility of the anticancer drugs irinotecan-HCl
and epirubicin-HCl in the same infusion solution.
Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 56, 529–534, 2005.
32
Tong WQ; Zhang GGZ, Stability and excipient
compatibility studies. Integrated Drug Product
Development Process (3 day-course), University of
Utah
http://www.pharmacy.utah.edu/pharmaceutics/pdf
/Stability.pdf, 2006.
33
Connors KA; Amidon GL; Stella VJ, Chemical
Stability of Pharmaceuticals: A Handbook for
Pharmacists. In 2nd ed.; John Wiley and Sons: New
York, 1986; pp 93-94.
34
Waternnan KC; Adami RC; Alsante KM; Hong J;
Landis MS; Lombardo F; Roberts CJ, Stabilization
of pharmaceuticals to oxidative degradation. Pharm.
Dev. Technol. 7, 1-32, 2002.
35
Mutalik S; Naha A; Usha AN; Ranjith AK;
Musmade P; Manoj K; Anju P; Prasanna S,
Preparation, 
in 
vitro, 
preclinical 
and 
clinical
evaluations of once daily sustained release tablets of
Aceclofenac. Arch. Pharm. Res. 30, (2), 222-234,
2007.
36
deCarvalho LAEB; Marques MPM; Tomkinson J,
Drug–excipient 
interactions in 
Ketoprofen: 
A
vibrational spectroscopy study. Biopolymers 82, 420-
424, 2006.
37
de Carvalho LAEB; Marques MPM; Tomkinson J,
Drug-excipient 
interactions 
in 
ketoprofen: 
A
vibrational spectroscopy study. Biopolymers 82, (4),
420-424, 2006.
38
Mura P; Manderioli A; Bramanti G; Furlanetto S;
Pinzauti S, Utilization of differential scanning
calorimetry as a screening technique to determine
the compatibility of ketoprofen with excipients. Int.
J. Pharm. 119, 71-79, 1995.
39
Abdoh A; Al-Omari MM; Badwan AA; Jaber AMY,
Amlodipine besylate-excipients interaction in solid
dosage form. Pharm. Dev. Technol. 9, 15-24, 2004.
40
Serajuddin ATM; Thakur AB; Ghosal RN; Fakes
MG; Ranadive SA; Morris KR; Varia SA, Selection
of solid dosage form composition through drug-
excipient compatibility testing. J. Pharm. Sci. 88,
696-704, 1999.
41
Eyjolfsson 
R, 
Lisinopril-lactose 
incompatibility.
Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 24, 797-798, 1998.
42
Botha SA; Lotter AP, Compatibility study between
oxprenolol hydrochloride, temazepam and tablet
excipients using differntial scanning calorimetry.
Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 16, 331-345, 1990.
43
Desai 
SR; 
Shaikh 
MM; 
Dharwadkar 
SR,
Preformulation compatibility studies of etamsylate
and fluconazole drugs with lacose by DSC. J.
Therm. Anal. Cal. 71, 651-658, 2003.
44
Bertol CD; Cruz AP; Stulzer HK; Murakami FS;
Silva MAS, Thermal decomposition kinetics and
compatibility studies of primaquine under isothermal
and non-isothermal conditions. J. Therm. Anal.
Calorim., 102, 187-192, 2010.
45
Thumma S; Repka MA, Compatibility studies of
promethazine hydrochloride with tablet excipients
by means of thermal and non-thermal methods.
Pharmazie 64, 183-189, 2009.
46
Wirth DD; Baertschi SW; Johnson RA; Maple SR;
Miller MS; Hallenbeck DK; Gregg SM, Maillard
Reaction of lactose and fluoxetine hydrochloride, a
secondary amine. J. Pharm. Sci. 87, 31–39, 1998.
47
Schildcrout SA; Risley DS; Kleemann RL, Drug-
excipient 
interactions 
of 
Seproxetine 
Maleate
hemihydrate: Isothermal stress methods. Drug Dev.
Ind. Pharm. 19, 1113-1130, 1993.
48
Mura P; Faucci MT; Manderioli A; Furlanetto S;
Pinzauti S, Thermal analysis as a screening technique
in preformulation studies of picotamide solid
dosage forms. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 24, 747-756,
1998.
49
Riaz M; Ami KH, Stability of aminophylline. Pak. J.
Pharm. Sci. 6, 35-44, 1993.
50
Signoretti EC; Dell'utri A; Salvo AD; Donini L,
Compatibility study between clenbuterol and tablet
excipients using differential scanning calorimetry.
Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 12, 603-620, 1986.
51
Monajjemzadeh F; Hassanzadeh D; Valizadeh H;
Shadbad MRS; Mojarrad JS; Robertson T; Roberts
MS, Assessment of feasibility of Maillard reaction
between 
Baclofen 
and 
lactose 
by 
liquid
chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry,
application 
to 
preformulation 
studies. 
AAPS
PharmSciTech 10, (2), 649-659, 2009.
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 22

=== Page 21 ===
Review Paper
52
Sarisuta N; Lawanprasert P; Puttipipatkhachorn S;
Srikummoon K, The influence of drug-excipient and
drug-polymer interactions on butt adhesive strength
of Ranitidine Hydrochloride film-coated tablets.
Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 32, 463-471, 2006.
53
Tonder ECV; Lotter AP; Botha SA, Compatibility
study between Doxylamine Succinate with other
drugs and excipients using differntial scanning
calorimetry. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 16, 2125-2133,
1990.
54
Flemming A; Picker-Freyer KM, Compaction of
lactose drug mixtures: Quantification of the extent
of incompatibility by FT-Raman spectroscopy. Eur.
J. Pharm. Biopharm. 68, (3), 802-810, 2008.
55
Misra M; Misra AK; Panpalia GM, Interaction study
between pefloxacin mesylate and some diluents
using DSC supported with isothermal method. J.
Therm. Anal. Cal. 89, 803–808, 2007.
56
Verma RK; Garg S, Selection of excipients for
extended release formulations of glipizide through
drug–excipient compatibility testing. J. Pharm.
Biomed. Anal. 38, 633–644, 2005.
57
Agatonovic-Kustrin S; Markovic N; Ginic-Markovic
M; Mangan M; Glass BD, Compatibility studies
between mannitol and omeprazole sodium isomers.
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 48, 356–360, 2008.
58
Barboza F; Vecchia DD; Tagliari MP; Silva MAS;
Stulzer HK, Differential scanning calorimetry as a
screening technique in compatibility studies of
Acyclovir 
extended 
release 
form ulations.
Pharmaceut. Chem. J. 43, 363-368, 2009.
59
Jaminet F; Louis G, Influence de quelques
lubrifiants sur la stabilite de l’Aspirine dans les
comprimes. Pharm. Acta Helv. 43, 153-157, 1968.
60
Miller TA; York P, Pharmaceutical tablet lubrication.
Int. J. Pharm. 41, 1-19, 1988.
61
Wissing S; Craig DQM; Barker SA; Moore WD, An
investigation into the use of stepwise isothermal high
sensitivity DSC as a means of detecting drug-
excipient incompatibility. Int. J. Pharm. 199, (2),
141-150, 2000.
62
Harding L; Qi S; Hill G; Reading M; Craig DQM,
The development of microthermal analysis and
photothermal 
microspectroscopy 
as 
novel
approaches to drug–excipient compatibility studies.
Int. J. Pharm. 354, 149–157, 2008.
63
Marini A; Berbenni V; Pegoretti M; Bruni G;
Cofrancesco P; Sinistri C; Villa M, Drug excipient
compatibility 
studies 
by 
physico 
chemical
techniques. The case of atenolol. J. Therm. Anal.
Cal. 73, 547-561, 2003.
64
Phipps MA; Winnike RA, Use of isothermal
microcalorimetry in the early detection of potential
drug formulation incompatibilities. Proc. Workshop
Microcalorim. Energ. Mater., M1-M14, 1997.
65
Freire FD; Aragao CFS; Moura TFAdLe; R. FN,
Compatibility study between chlorpropamide and
excipients in their physical mixtures. J. Therm. Anal.
Calorim. 97, 355-357, 2009.
66
Cides LCS; Araújo AAS; Santos-Filho M; Matos JR,
Thermal 
behaviour, 
compatibility 
study 
and
decomposition 
kinetics 
of 
glimepiride 
under
isothermal and non-isothermal conditions. J. Therm.
Anal. Cal. 84, (2), 441-445, 2006.
67
Oliveira 
GGG; 
Ferraz 
HG; 
Matos 
JSR,
Thermoanalytical 
study 
of 
glibenclamide 
and
excipients. J. Therm. Anal. Cal. 79, 267-270, 2005.
68
Cheng W-T; Wang S-L; Lin S-Y, Solid-state
interaction study on the captopril/lubricants systems
accelerated by grinding process. J. Phys. Chem. 69,
(4), 1007-1016, 2008.
69
Stulzer HK; Rodrigues PO; Cardoso TM; Matos
JSR; Silva MAS, Compatibility studies between
Captopril and pharmaceutical excipients used in
tablets formulations. J. Therm. Anal. Cal. 91,
323–328, 2008.
70
Strickley RG; Visor GC; Lin L; Gu L, An
unexpected pH effect on the stability of moexipril
lyophilized powder. Pharm. Res. 6, 971-975, 1989.
71
El-Shattawy 
HH; 
Kildsig 
DO; 
Peck 
GE,
C ephalexin-direct 
compression 
excipients:
Preformulation stability screening using differential
scanning calorimetry. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 8, 897-
909, 1982.
72
El-Shattawy 
HH; 
Kildsig 
DO; 
Peck 
GE,
Erythromycin - Direct compression excipients:
Preformulation stability screening using differential
ccanning calorimetry Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 8,
937–947, 1982.
73
El-Shattawy 
HH, 
Nalidixic 
acid 
- 
Direct
compression excipients, preformulation stability
screening using differential scanning calorimetry
Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 10, 491–504, 1984.
74
Jacobson H; Reier G, Application of differential
thermal analysis to compatibility and stability
problems in penicillin-stearic acid mixtures. J.
Pharm. Sci. 58, 631-633, 1969.
75
Malan CEP; de Villiers MM; Lotter AP, Evaluation 
of compatibility of tablet excipients with
albendazole and closantel using DSC and HPLC.
Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 23, 533-537, 1997.
76
Cunha-Filho MSS; Martýnez-Pacheco R; Landin M,
Compatibility of the antitumoral â-lapachone with
different solid dosage forms excipients. J. Pharm.
Biomed. Anal. 45, 590-598, 2007.
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 23

=== Page 22 ===
Review Paper
77
Doser KH; Glanzer K; Loffler U Pharmaceutical
formulation for salts of monobasic acids with
clopidogrel. 2007/0048370 A1, Mar. 1, 2007, 2007.
78
Voigt R; Pergande G; Keipert S, Comparative
studies on the study of drug-excipient interactions
with vapor pressure osmometry and equilibrium
dialysis. Pharmazie 39, (11), 760-763, 1984.
79
Bruni G; Berbenni V; Milanese C; Girella A; Marini
A, Drug-excipient compatibility studies in binary and
ternary mixtures by physico-chemical techniques. J.
Therm. Anal. Cal., 102, 193-201, 2010.
80
Kiss D; Zelkó R; Novák C; Éhen Z, Application of
DSC and NIRS to study the compatibility of
metronidazole 
with 
different 
pharmaceutical
excipients. J. Therm. Anal. Cal. 84, 447-451, 2006.
81
Jin P; Madieh S; Augsburger LL, The solution and
solid state stability and excipient compatibility of
Parthenolide in Feverfew. AAPS PharmSciTech 8,
E1-E6, 2007.
82
Indrayanto 
G; 
Mugihardjo; 
Handayani 
R,
Compatibility study between famotidine and some
excipients using differential scanning calorimetry.
Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 20, 911-920, 1994.
83
Pignatello R; Ferro M; Puglisi G, Preparation of
solid dispersions of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs with acrylic polymers and studies on
mechanisms of drug-polymer interactions. AAPS
PharmSciTech 3, (2), 1-11 [article 10], 2002.
http://www.aapspharmscitech.org/articles/pt0302/
pt030210/pt030210.pdf
84
Pignatello R; Ferro M; Guidi GD; Salemi G;
Vandelli MA; Guccione S; Geppi M; Forte C; Puglisi
G, Preparation, characterisation and photosensitivity
studies of solid dispersions of diflunisal and
Eudragit RS100 and RL100. Int. J. Pharm., (218),
27–42, 2001.
85
Gordon 
RE; 
VanKoevering 
CL; 
Reits 
DJ,
Utilization of differential scanning calorimetry in the
compatibility screening of ibuprofen with the
stearate lubricants and construction of phase
diagrams. Int. J. Pharm. 21, 99-105, 1984.
86
Pignatello R; Spadaro D; Vandelli MA; Forni F;
Puglisi G, Characterization of the mechanism of
interaction 
in 
Ibuprofen 
- 
Eudragit 
RL100
coevaporates. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 30, 277–288,
2004.
87
Cotton ML; Wu DW; Vadas EB, Drug-excipient
interaction study of enalapril maleate using thermal
analysis and scanning electron microscopy. Int. J.
Pharm. 40, 129-142, 1987.
88
Devi MV; Babu PSSK, Drug-excipient interaction
studies on enalapril maleate Int. J. Pharm. Excipients
2, 153-158 2000.
89
Dong Z; Choi DS, Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose
acetate 
succinate: 
Potential 
drug–excipient
incompatibility. AAPS PharmSciTech 9, (3), 991-
997, 2008.
90
Teraoka R; Matsushima Y; Sugimoto I; Inoue K;
Morita S-y; Kitagawa S, Effect of pharmaceutical
excipients on the stability of Trichlormethiazide
tablets under humid conditions. Chem. Pharm. Bull.
57, (12), 1343-1347, 2009.
91
Cory W.C; Harris C; Martinez S, Accelerated
degradation of ibuprofen in tablets. Pharm. Dev.
Technol., 15, 636-643, 2010.
92
Vecchio S; Rodante F; Tomassetti M, Thermal
stability of disodium and calcium phosphomycin and
the effects of the excipients evaluated by thermal
analysis. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 24, 1111-1123,
2001.
93
Lieberman 
HH; 
Lachman 
L; 
Schwartz 
JB,
Pharmaceutical dosage forms: Tablets. In 2nd
Edition ed.; Lieberman HH; Lachman L; Schwartz
JB, Eds. Marcel Dekker, Inc.: NewYork, Basel,
1989; Vol. I, p 557.
94
Sabnis S; Rege P; Block LH, Use of chitosan in
compressed tablets of diclofenac sodium: Inhibition
of drug release in an acidic environment. Pharm.
Dev. Technol. 2, (3), 243-255, 1997.
95
Drebushchak VA; Shakhtshneider TP; Apenina SA;
Medvedeva AS; Safronova LP; Boldyrev VV,
Thermoanalytical investigation of drug-excipient
interaction. Part II. Activated mixtures of piroxicam
with cellulose and chitosan. J. Therm. Anal. Cal. 86,
303–309, 2006.
96
Kararli TT; Needham TE; Seul CJ; Finnegan PM,
Solid state interaction of magnesium oxide and
ibuprofen to form a salt. Pharm. Res. 6, 804–808,
1989.
97
Yuan L-C; Dahl TC; Oliyai R, Effect of carbonate
salts on the kinetics of acid-catalyzed dimerization of
adefovir dipivoxil. Pharm. Res. 17, 1098-1103, 2000.
98
Moreton RC, Excipient interactions. In Excipient
developemnt for pharmaceutical, biotechnology and
drug delivery systems, Katdare A; Chaubal M, Eds.
Informa Healthcare USA, Inc: New York, 2006; p
105.
99
Blaug 
S; 
H u ang 
W , 
Interaction 
of
dextroamphetamine sulfate with spraydried lactose.
J. Pharm. Sci. 61, 1770-1775, 1972.
100 Hartauer KJ; Guillory JK, A comparison of diffuse
reflectance FTIR spectroscopy and DSC in the
characterization of a drug excipient interaction.
Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 17, 617-630, 1991.
101 Santos AFO; BasílioJr ID; Souza FSd; Medeiros
AFD; Pinto MF; Santana DPd; Macedo RO,
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 24

=== Page 23 ===
Review Paper
Application of thermal analysis of binary mixtures
with metformin. J. Therm. Anal. Cal. 93, (2), 361-
364, 2008.
102 Cavatur R; Vemuri NM; Chrzan Z, Use of
isothermal 
microcalorimetry 
in 
pharmaceutical
preformulation studies part III. Evaluation of
excipient compatibility of a new chemical entity. J.
Therm. Anal. Cal. 78, 63–72, 2004.
103 Verloop Q; Marais AF; deVilliers MM; Liebenberg
W, Compatibility of sennoside A and B with
pharmaceutical excipients. Pharmazie 59, 728-730,
2004.
104 Ahlneck C; Zografi G, The molecular basis of
moisture effects on the physical and chemical
stability of drugs in the solid state. Int. J. Pharm. 62,
87–95, 1990.
105 Castello RA; Mattocks AM, Discoloration of tablets
containing amines and lactose. J. Pharm. Sci. 51,
106-108, 1962.
106 Mroso PN; Li Wan Po A; Irwin WJ, Solid state
stability of aspirin in the presence of exciplents:
kinetic interpretation, modelling and prediction. J.
Pharm. Sci. 71, 1096-1101, 1982.
107 Reepmeyer JC; Kirchhoefer RD, Isolation of
salicylsalicylic acid, acetylsalicylsalicylic acid, and
acetylsalicylic anhydride from aspirin tablets by
extraction and high-pressure liquid chromatography.
J. Pharm. Sci. 68, 1167-1169, 1979.
108 Mitrevej 
A; 
Hollenbeck 
RG, 
Influence 
of
hydrophilic excipients on the interaction of aspirin
and water. Int. J. Pharm. 14, 243-250, 1983.
109 Kornblum 
SS; 
Zoglio 
MA, 
Pharmaceutical
heterogeneous systems I. Hydrolysis of aspirin in
combination with tablet lubricants in an aqueous
suspension. J. Pharm. Sci. 56, 1569-1575, 1967.
110 Nelson E; Eppich D; Carstensen JT, Topochemical
decomposition patterns of aspirin. J. Pharm. Sci. 63,
755-757, 1974.
111 Troup 
AE; 
Mitchner 
H, 
Degradation 
of
phenylephrine hydrochloride in tablet formulations
containing aspirin. J. Pharm. Sci. 53, 375–379, 1964.
112 Jacobs AL; Dilatush AE; Weinstein S; Windheuser
JJ, Formation of acetylcodeine from aspirin and
codeine. J. Pharm. Sci. 55, 893–895, 1966.
113 Koshy KT; Troup AE; Duvall RN; Conwell RN;
Shankle LL, Acetylation of acetaminophen in tablet
formulations containing aspirin. J. Pharm. Sci. 56,
1117–1121, 1967.
114 Kartal A; Björkqvist M; Lehto V-P; Juppo AM;
Marvola M; Sivén M, Compatibility of chewing gum
excipients with the amino acid L-cysteine and
stability 
of 
the 
active 
substance 
in 
directly
compressed chewing gum formulation. J. Pharm.
Pharmacol. 60, 1131-1138, 2008.
115 Zoglio MA; Maulding HV; Haller RM; Briggen S,
Pharmaceutical 
heterogeneous 
systems 
III.
Inhibition of stearate lubricant induced degradation
of aspirin by the use of certain organic acids. J.
Pharm. Sci. 57, 1877-1880, 1968.
116 Garg 
A; 
Singh 
S; 
Rao 
VU; 
Bindu 
K;
Balasubramaniam J, Solid State Interaction of
Raloxifene HCl with Different Hydrophilic Carriers
During Co-grinding and its Effect on Dissolution
Rate. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 35, 455-470, 2009.
117 Chan AS Fluoride stability in dicalcium phosphate
dihydrate 
composition. 
United 
States 
Patent
5037636, 1991.
118 Thakur AB; Chen X; Bugay DE; Serajuddin ATM,
Solid state incompatibility of dicalcium phosphate
dihydrate with the sodium salt of a poorly water-
soluble drug. Pharm. Res. 11 (Supl.), S166, 1994.
119 Stroyer A; McGinity JW; Leopard CS, Solid State
Interactions between the Proton Pump Inhibitor
Omeprazole and Various Enteric Coating Polymers.
J. Pharm. Sci. 95, 1342-1353, 2006.
120 Rezende RLO; Santoro MIRM; Matos JR, Stability
and compatibility study of Enalapril maleate using
thermoanalytical techniques. J. Therm. Anal. Cal. 93,
881-886, 2008.
121 Jun HW; Whitworth CW; Luzzi LA, Decomposition
of aspirin in polyethylene glycols. J. Pharm. Sci. 61,
1160-1162, 1972.
122 Whitworth CW; Luzzi LA; Thompson BB; Jun HW,
Stability of aspirin in liquid and semisolid bases II:
Effect of fatty additives on stability in a polyethylene
glycol base. J. Pharm. Sci. 62, 1372-1374, 1973.
123 Ha E; Wang W; Wang J, Peroxide formation in
polysorbate 80 and protein stability. J. Pharm. Sci.
91, 2252-2264, 2002.
124 Ilium L, Chitosan and its use as a pharmaceutical
excipient. Pharm. Res. 15, 1326-1331, 1998.
125 Patel H; Stalcup A; Dansereau R; Sakr A, The effect
of excipients on the stability of levothyroxine
sodium pentahydrate tablets. Int. J. Pharm. 264, 35-
43, 2003.
126 Kumar V; Shah RP; Malik S; Singh S, Compatibility
of 
atenolol 
with 
excipients: 
LC–MS/TOF
characterization 
of 
degradation/interaction
products, and mechanisms of their formation. J.
Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 49, 880–888, 2009.
127 Lira AM; Araujo AAS; Basilio IDJ; Santos BLL;
Santana DP; Macedo RO, Compatibility studies of
lapachol with pharmaceutical excipients for the
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 25

=== Page 24 ===
Review Paper
development of topical formulations. Thermochim.
Acta 457, (1-2), 1-6, 2007.
128 Moyano MA; Broussalis AM; Segall AI, Thermal
analysis of lipoic acid and evaluation of the
compatibility with excipientes. J. Therm. Anal.
Calorim., 99, 631-637, 2010.
129 Alexander KS; Pudipeddi M; Parker GA, Stability of
hydralazine hydrochloride syrup compounded from
tablets. Am. J. Hosp. Pharm. 50, 683-686, 1993.
130 Munjal M; Stodghill SP; ElSohly MA; Repka MA,
P o ly m e ric 
sy ste m s 
fo r 
am o rp h o u s 
9 -
tetrahydrocannabinol 
produced 
by 
a 
hot-melt
method. Part I: Chemical and thermal stability
during processing. J. Pharm. Sci. 95, (8), 1841-1853,
2006.
This Journal is © IPEC-Americas Inc
J. Excipients and Food Chem. 1 (3) 2010 - 26

