=== Page 1 ===
A review of environmental and
health effects of synthetic
cosmetics
Yohannes Desalegn Wirtu*
Department of Environmental Science, College of Natural Sciences, Madda Walabu University, Oromia,
Ethiopia
The use of cosmetic products is expanding globally, and with it, so is the range
of chemical substances employed in their production. As a result, there is also
a higher risk of intoxication, allergic reactions, prolonged chemical exposure,
adverse effects, and indiscriminate use. Cosmetic products can contain more
than 10,000 ingredients. Most users of synthetic cosmetics are unaware of the
harmful effects if they even are. However, it is linked to many diseases like
cancer, congenital disabilities, reproductive impairments, developmental
systems, contact dermatitis, hair loss, lung damage, old age, skin diseases
and reactions, allergies, and harm to human nails. Many beauty products also
create a high demand for natural oils, leading to extensive and intensive
cultivation,
harming
natural
habitats
through
deforestation,
and
contaminating
soil
and
water
through
pesticides
and
fertilizers.
The
adverse effects of hazardous substances in synthetic cosmetics extend
beyond human health and inﬂuence ecosystems, air quality, and oceans.
Thus, this review aims to assess the environmental and health impacts of
cosmetics using published scientiﬁc articles. The study used a systematic
review based on Scopus, Science Direct, Web databases, Scholar Google, and
PubMed. The results of this review showed that the formulation of cosmetics
until the disposal of their containers could adversely affect environmental and
human health.
KEYWORDS
cosmetic pollution, cosmetic impact, cosmetics and human health, cosmetic products,
environmental impact, health risks, synthetic cosmetics, waste management
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Antonije Onjia,
University of Belgrade, Serbia
REVIEWED BY
Slavica Ražić,
University of Belgrade, Serbia
Milica Lučić,
University of Belgrade, Serbia
Aleksandra Nastasović,
University of Belgrade, Serbia
*CORRESPONDENCE
Yohannes Desalegn Wirtu,
yohannisdesalegn@gmail.com
RECEIVED 18 March 2024
ACCEPTED 20 September 2024
PUBLISHED 22 October 2024
CITATION
Wirtu YD (2024) A review of environmental and
health effects of synthetic cosmetics.
Front. Environ. Sci. 12:1402893.
doi: 10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893
COPYRIGHT
© 2024 Wirtu. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
01
TYPE Review
PUBLISHED 22 October 2024
DOI 10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 2 ===
GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
1 Introduction
The market size of the beauty sector, which is estimated to be
$48.8 billion and is still expanding, is enormous. People frequently
use makeup to express who they are; individuality and self-
expression are signiﬁcant facets of who we are. However, the
effects of the cosmetics business and its products on the
environment are signiﬁcant and cannot be disregarded. The
beauty sector has substantial environmental consequences, from
excessive packaging waste to the utilization of natural resources like
palm and soy. Beauty packaging generates 120 billion garbage units
annually, including plastic, paper, glass, and metals that are
inadequately
recycled
and
ultimately
wind
up
in
landﬁlls,
according to the social justice platform It should be emphasized
that the Traceability and Veriﬁcation System is the UNICEF Supply
Division. The demand for natural oils from several cosmetic goods
also increases, which encourages vast and intense farming, damages
natural ecosystems through deforestation, and contaminates soil
and water with pesticides and fertilizers (Gutierrez, 2023).
Any substance that is poured, sprinkled, sprayed, inserted into,
or otherwise applied to the human body is a cosmetic (Attard and
Abstract,
2022)
and
is
used
to
clean,
beautify,
promote
attractiveness, or alter the appearance without disrupting the
body’s physiological
functions
(John Kanayochukwu
Nduka,
2019). The body’s physiological processes should not be changed
during this process by cosmetics. Cosmetics must be efﬁcient,
durable, stable, and safe for human use. They are mixes of
certain surfactants, oils, and other substances. It is challenging to
monitor the safety of every product, with so many being introduced
to the market each season, and certain items can contain
carcinogenic chemicals (Alam et al., 2019).
According to published research, cosmetic products like lipstick,
lip gloss, eye shadow, and henna hair color contain high levels of
hazardous
lead
(Kaličanin
and
Velimirović,
2016;
Łodyga-
ChruŘcińska et al., 2018). Triclosan is a common antibiotic likely
present in consumer goods and personal care items utilized by 75%
of the U.S. population. Following a risk evaluation by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration, Triclosan (TCS) was eliminated from
soap products in September 2016 (FDA). Triclosan is still present,
but, in high proportions, in various personal care items such as
surgical
soaps,
mouthwash,
hand
sanitizer,
and
toothpaste
(Weatherly and Gosse, 2017).
Heavy metals are a common constituent in cosmetic goods
(Alam et al., 2019). According to Velly et al., lead levels in toothpaste
were higher than permitted by U.S. and E.U. guidelines (Vella and
Attard, 2019). Polyethylene glycol (PEGs) (favorably used as
penetration enhancers), according to Panico et al., may still
contain
contaminants,
including
lead,
iron,
cobalt,
nickel,
cadmium,
and
arsenic
(Łodyga-ChruŘcińska
et
al.,
2018)
described how lead and nickel were present in lipsticks and
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
02
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 3 ===
powders on the Polish market at levels prohibited by European
regulations (Łodyga-ChruŘcińska et al., 2018).
Most
chemicals
are
included
in
cosmetic
products
as
preservatives, surfactants, perfumes, stains, etc. These compounds
also improve the items’ quality, properties, and shelf lives while
improving user appeal (Pereira and Pereira, 2018). However, many
of these chemicals also have adverse side effects (Figure 1). Clinical
symptoms most frequently reported include conjunctivitis, cosmetic
acne,
photoallergic/toxic,
contact
dermatitis,
hypo/
hyperpigmentation, itching, and corrosive scalp injury. These
reactions may occur immediately after application or after
repeated use (Mestawet et al., 2018).
Documents show that natural material extracts were employed
previously, but synthetic substances are now frequently found in
cosmetic items. Some of these artiﬁcial additions may endanger the
health of consumers. The underarm and breast area’s estrogenic
cosmetics are being looked into as a potential source of breast cancer
(Amasa et al., 2012; Rootid et al., 2022). There have also been
reports
of
birth
abnormalities,
reproductive
issues,
and
developmental
issues
(Okereke
et
al.,
2015;
Kaličanin
and
Velimirović, 2016).
Environmental concerns are another issue with cosmetics. The
environmental effect of about $400 billion and the expanding
worldwide cosmetics and beauty business ranges from the
procurement of raw materials to production, distribution, and
trash produced by end-users (Chouhan and Himanshu Vig,
2021). Cosmetics impact the oceans, the air quality, and the
ecosystems that have sustained ﬂora and fauna for thousands of
years, in addition to the local landﬁlls ﬁlled with mountains of
single-use plastics (Young, 2022). Species are vanishing so that
makeup and skincare palettes can be made. In addition to how
the items’ production and disposal affect wildlife, they also suffer
directly from 80 percent of the world’s population’s continued use of
animal testing (European Parliament, 2018).
In contrast to pharmaceutical medications, personal care, and
cosmetic items can only be used externally. Due to human activity,
such as washing, taking a shower, or taking a bath, they are more
likely to enter the environment in large quantities and contribute to
more ecological systems. Shampoos, soaps, toothpaste, and shower
gels are examples of personal care products that often fall under
sanitary practices and should be rinsed off immediately. However,
some personal care items, like sanitizers and sunscreen lotion, are
leave-on products. Typically, cosmetics are applied to items and left
on the skin for at least a few hours (Borowska and Brzóska, 2015).
When cosmetics are removed, washed, or used in the shower, they
enter sewage treatment facilities, which are ineffective at eliminating
all contaminants from substances in personal care and cosmetic
goods (Ray et al., 2020). As a result, these chemicals gather with
sewage sludge, which is subsequently applied to crops as fertilizer,
opening up a route for their entry into the food chain (Juliano and
Magrini, 2017).
The most prevalent types of personal care and cosmetic
pollutants
are
organic
chemicals
(bisphenol-A,
p-chloro-m-
xylenol, triclosan, grease, fat, and surfactants), which not only
harm the aquatic environment but also have an equivalent
impact on the plants and human health (Ray et al., 2020). With
the increasing popularity of cosmetics, along with reports of toxicity
in products sold globally and their adverse effects on both human
health and the environment, it is justiﬁable to closely examine
these issues.
However, cosmetics in developing nations like Ethiopia do not
require marketing authorization, unlike medicinal products. In the
Western world, most countries have laws and regulations on
cosmetic safety and labeling (Bilal et al., 2017). As is the case in
many other nations, the drug regulatory system does not devote
much or any effort to safeguarding the general public and the
environment from the negative impacts that these products may
have. The companies are in charge of ensuring the safety of the
cosmetic products; however, due to various factors, these businesses
are business-oriented and pay little to no attention to the cosmetic
products’ safety. Some of them include the need to alter test
procedures, formulas, packaging, and advertising which could
increase sector costs (Amasa et al., 2012).
Additionally, some customers choose not to read the labels of
cosmetic items to determine the ingredients and other essential
details before using them (Bilal et al., 2017). Therefore, the high rate
of illiteracy and lax enforcement of laws leave a gap if faulty goods
are put onto the market and cause harm to the environment and
people. The purpose of this review was to get insight into the effects
of harmful substances in synthetic cosmetics on both human health
and the environment.
2 Approach
This review has selected 215 studies published between 1995 and
2024. An adequate literature analysis has been conducted to examine
the most recent data on the chemical components of cosmetics,
including epidemiological research addressing risk factors for
various diseases. This narrative review considered pertinent
studies on synthetic cosmetics, environmental and human health
effects, and management issues. The narrative literature review was
according to Pereira and Pereira (2018). In this review, we used
literature published in English (Wan et al., 2024), and there were no
constraints on the year of publication or type of study setting. We
also considered some grey literature, including databases and the
most recent reports that were released. Case studies, analytical cross-
sectional studies, policy review papers, systematic reviews, and other
pertinent studies were also considered. Databases including Scopus,
Science
Direct,
Web
databases,
Scholar
Google,
PubMed,
Environmental
Science
and
Technology,
Government
and
Environmental Organizations, and Regulatory Agencies were
employed
to
access
published
scientiﬁc
publications.
Grey
literature and reference lists for the studies under evaluation were
found using Google.
The inclusion criteria for scholarly papers were as follows:
Papers
should
be
published
in
peer-reviewed
journals
or
reputable academic sources, written in English, and provide
relevant empirical data, analysis, or theoretical insights on the
effects of toxic ingredients in synthetic cosmetics on humans and
the environment. They must contain the terms “cosmetic pollution,”
“cosmetic toxicity,” “cosmetic impact,” “cosmetic intoxication,”
“cosmetic risk,” “cosmetic danger,” “cosmetic and human health,”
or “cosmetic side effects.” Scientiﬁc papers that discussed cosmetic
surgery, and cosmetic impact written in a non-English language or
had no connection to cosmetic impact items were omitted, as per the
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
03
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 4 ===
exclusion criteria. Reviews and original publications with a
toxicological and clinical perspective were among the scientiﬁc
literature chosen. The primary hazardous chemicals found in
cosmetic items are linked to potential health issues in the
scientiﬁc literature using this technique. The clinical-toxicological
connection is made a useful tool to explain and comprehend the
adverse effects of using cosmetics through this integrative study,
bringing attention to the underutilized use of these items and
emphasizing the accompanying health hazards.
The impact of synthetic cosmetics on the environment and
health, associated issues, and potential solutions were the focus of
this review, which focused on speciﬁc studies on the subject. The
evidence was compiled and given section by section to make it
simple to summarize the results by subject area. Accordingly,
the aspects of common toxic chemical compounds that harm
human and environmental health are the subject of this article
(Siti Zulaikha et al., 2015). This review consists of ﬁve sections
as follows:
1. Common Hazardous Chemicals in Synthetic Cosmetics
- Identiﬁcation and discussion of chemicals posing risks to
health and the environment.
2. Consequences
of
Cosmetics
on
Environment
and
Human Health
- Analysis of the impacts of cosmetic use on ecosystems,
wildlife, and human wellbeing.
3. Difﬁculties in Controlling Substances in Cosmetics
- Examination
of
challenges
related
to
regulation,
enforcement, and monitoring of cosmetic ingredients.
4. Management Strategy
- Proposal of strategies and approaches to mitigate risks
associated with cosmetic chemicals.
5. Conclusion
- Summary and key ﬁndings from the study.
3 Result and discussion
Chart 1 Show trends in publications and citations on Human
Health and ecological effects of synthetic cosmetics (2000–2023).
The data for “Chart 1” were obtained from multiple reputable
scientiﬁc databases, including PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus,
and Google Scholar. These databases were chosen due to their
comprehensive
coverage
of
scientiﬁc
literature
and
their
reliability in providing peer-reviewed literature on synthetic
cosmetic and their effect.
To gather relevant data, we used speciﬁc search strings tailored to
identify studies on health and ecological risks associated with cosmetic
ingredients. The search strings used are keywords in Figure 2. The
search results were ﬁltered to include peer-reviewed articles and
reviews published within the last decade. Data were extracted from
the selected studies and categorized into health and ecological risks.
Synthesizing this data to provide a comprehensive overview of the
trends, which were then visualized in “Chart 1.”
The Chart titled “Trend in publication and citations on human
health and ecological effects of synthetic cosmetics (2000–2023)”
illustrates the academic interest and impact of research in this ﬁeld
over 23 years. Publications addressing human health effects are
depicted with a blue line, while those addressing environmental
effects are shown with a grey line. The trends illustrate the growing
academic interest and impact in these ﬁelds over the past two
decades. The data is divided into four categories: Human health
risk publications, Human health risk citations, Ecological risk
publications, and Ecological risk citations.
3.1 Human health risk publications (blue line)
The blue line represents the number of publications focused on
human health risks associated with synthetic cosmetics. Over the years,
this number has remained relatively stable, with minor ﬂuctuations.
The number of publications typically stays below 100 per year,
indicating a constant but modest level of research activity in this
area. This suggests that while there is ongoing interest, the volume
of new research published annually has not seen signiﬁcant growth.
3.2 Human health risk citations (red line)
The red line shows the number of citations for publications on
human health risks. Unlike the steady trend in publications,
citations exhibit signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations. Notable peaks occur
around
2008
and
2018,
indicating
periods
of
heightened
academic or public interest in these studies. These spikes may be
linked to regulatory changes, high-proﬁle studies, or increased
public awareness. However, there is a sharp decline in citations
after 2020, suggesting a decrease in the impact or relevancy of earlier
studies in recent years.
FIGURE 1
Graphic abstract of environmental and health effects of
synthetic cosmetics.
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
04
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 5 ===
3.3 Ecological risk publications (gray line)
The grey line represents publications on the ecological risks of
synthetic cosmetics. These publications are consistently fewer in
number compared to those on human health risks, remaining below
50 per year. The trend is relatively ﬂat, showing little variation over
the years. This indicates that ecological concerns have not
signiﬁcantly driven an increase in research output, possibly
reﬂecting either a lower priority or fewer resources allocated to
this area compared to human health.
3.4 Ecological risk citation (yellow line)
The yellow line tracks citations of ecological risk publications.
Citation in this category also shows high peaks, particularly around
2008 and 2018, similar to the pattern observed for human health risk
citation but with a much higher magnitude. This suggests that
during these peak years, studies on ecological risks had a
signiﬁcant academic or public impact. Following these peaks,
there, is a notable decline in citations after 2020, which may
indicate a shift in the research focuses or a decrease in the
perceived relevance of previous studies.
The overall trend depicted in the chart reveals that while the
number of publications on human health and ecological risks od
synthetic cosmetics has been stable and relatively low, the impact of
these publications, as measured by citations, has experienced
signiﬁcant
ﬂuctuations.
Picks
in
citation
numbers
around
2008 and 2018 highlight periods of increased attention, possibly
due to emerging evidence, regulatory changes, or heightened
public concern. However, the decline in citations post-2020
suggests shifting interest or a saturation point in the ﬁeld, where
newer
studies
may
be
needed
to
reignite
academic
and
public interest.
3.5 Databases and sources for health
risk trends
1. PubMed: A comprehensive database of biomedical literature,
PubMed contains numerous studies on the health effects of
cosmetic ingredients such as parabens, UV ﬁlters, and
fragrances.
Researchers
and
healthcare
professionals
frequently use this database to access peer-reviewed articles
on
allergic
reactions,
endocrine
disruption,
and
other
health impacts.
2. Scopus: Scopus offers extensive coverage of scientiﬁc, technical,
medical, and social science research. It includes articles on the
long-term health effects of various cosmetic ingredients,
regulatory updates, and emerging trends in toxicology and
public health.
3. Web of Science: This multidisciplinary database provides
access to research articles, conference proceedings, and
reviews. It is useful for tracking the latest studies on the
health risks of cosmetic ingredients and understanding the
evolving landscape of regulatory science.
4. Regulatory Agencies: Regulatory bodies such as the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA), and Health Canada publish guidelines, safety
assessments, and updates on restricted or banned substances
in cosmetics. These sources provide authoritative information
on regulatory trends and health risk assessments.
3.6 Databases and sources for ecological
risk trends
1. Environmental
Science
Databases:
Databases
like
Environmental Science and Technology (ES&T) and the
Journal of Environmental Management publish research on
CHART 1
Treand in publications and citations on human health and ecological effects of synthetic cosmetics (2000–2023).
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
05
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 6 ===
the environmental impacts of cosmetic ingredients, including
their persistence, bioaccumulation, and toxicity to aquatic life.
2. Google Scholar: A freely accessible web search engine that
indexes scholarly articles across various disciplines. It provides
access to studies on the ecological effects of ingredients like
triclosan, microplastics, and UV ﬁlters.
3. ScienceDirect: An extensive database offering access to a large
collection of scientiﬁc and technical research articles. It covers
studies on the environmental behavior and risks of cosmetic
ingredients.
4. Government and Environmental Organizations: Reports and
publications
from
organizations
such
as
the
U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the European
Environment
Agency
(EEA),
and
the
United
Nations
Environment
Programme
(UNEP)
provide
data
and
analyses on the ecological risks of cosmetic ingredients.
FIGURE 2
Systematic protocol for retrieving the datasets.
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
06
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 7 ===
3.7 How the trends are based
3.7.1 Health risks
The trends in health risks are based on a synthesis of ﬁndings
from
clinical
studies,
toxicological
research,
and
regulatory
assessments.
These
include
experimental
data
on
allergic
reactions, long-term exposure effects, and endocrine disruption,
as well as updates from regulatory bodies on banned or restricted
substances.
3.7.2 Ecological risks
The trends in ecological risks are derived from environmental
monitoring studies, ecotoxicological research, and reports on the
persistence
and bioaccumulation
of cosmetic
ingredients in
ecosystems.
These
studies
provide
insights
into
how
these
substances affect aquatic life, microbial communities, and overall
ecosystem health.
3.8 Health and ecological risks of cosmetic
ingredients
3.8.1 Health risks of cosmetic ingredients
Cosmetic ingredients, while enhancing appearance and personal
hygiene, can pose signiﬁcant health risks to consumers. These risks
range from immediate allergic reactions to long-term health
concerns, including hormonal disruptions and chronic illnesses.
Understanding these risks is crucial for making informed choices
about cosmetic products.
3.8.1.1 Increase in allergic reactions due to parabens and
fragrances
Parabens, commonly used as preservatives in cosmetics, have
been linked to an increase in allergic reactions. These compounds
can cause skin irritation, rashes, and other dermatological issues,
especially in individuals with sensitive skin (Rastogi et al., 1995;
Zareba et al., 2007). Fragrances, another prevalent ingredient in
cosmetics, are also major allergens. Studies have shown that
fragrances can cause contact dermatitis and exacerbate conditions
like eczema and asthma.
3.8.1.2 Long-term health effects of UV ﬁlters and endocrine
disruptors
UV ﬁlters, such as oxybenzone and octinoxate, are essential in
protecting skin from harmful UV radiation. However, these
chemicals are also known as endocrine disruptors, capable of
interfering with hormone function. Long-term exposure to UV
ﬁlters
has
been
associated
with
reproductive
issues,
developmental problems, and an increased risk of certain cancers.
Endocrine disruptors in cosmetics, including phthalates and
bisphenol
A
(BPA),
similarly
pose
risks,
affecting
thyroid
function and metabolic processes over time (Li et al., 2017; Liu
et al., 2021).
3.8.1.3 Regulatory updates on banned or restricted
substances
Regulatory bodies worldwide are continually updating lists of
banned or restricted substances in cosmetics to protect public health.
For instance, the European Union’s Scientiﬁc Committee on
Consumer Safety (SCCS) regularly reviews and restricts the use
of harmful chemicals like certain parabens, formaldehyde-releasing
preservatives, and speciﬁc UV ﬁlters (Scientiﬁc Committee on
Consumer
Safety,
2021).
These
regulatory
changes
aim
to
mitigate the risks posed by toxic cosmetic ingredients and
promote safer alternatives.
3.8.2 Ecological risks of cosmetic ingredients
Cosmetic ingredients not only affect human health but also pose
signiﬁcant ecological risks. These substances can accumulate in the
environment,
disrupting
ecosystems
and
harming
wildlife.
Understanding these risks is essential for developing sustainable
cosmetic products.
3.8.2.1 Bioaccumulation and persistence of parabens and
UV ﬁlters in aquatic environments
Parabens and UV ﬁlters once washed off the skin, enter aquatic
environments through wastewater. Studies have shown that these
chemicals persist in water bodies, bioaccumulate in aquatic
organisms, and disrupt endocrine functions in ﬁsh and other
wildlife (Brausch and Rand, 2011). The long-term environmental
persistence of these substances raises concerns about their
cumulative impact on aquatic ecosystems (Ullah et al., 2017).
3.8.2.2 Impact of triclosan and other antimicrobials on
microbial communities and aquatic life
Triclosan, an antimicrobial agent used in many personal care
products, has been found to adversely affect microbial communities
in aquatic environments. This disruption can lead to antibiotic
resistance and negatively impact the health of aquatic life.
Research indicates that triclosan can impair reproduction and
development in ﬁsh, amphibians, and invertebrates (Liu and
Wong, 2013).
3.8.2.3 Studies on the effects of microplastics from
exfoliants on marine ecosystems
Microplastics, often used in exfoliating products, pose a
signiﬁcant
threat
to
marine
ecosystems.
These
tiny
plastic
particles are ingested by marine organisms, leading to physical
harm,
chemical
contamination,
and
disruption
of
feeding
behaviors. Studies have documented the presence of microplastics
in various marine species, indicating widespread ecological impact
and highlighting the need for biodegradable alternatives (Gago
et al., 2018).
3.9 Toxic ingredients in cosmetics
A signiﬁcant issue in the cosmetics industry is the general lack of
consumer awareness about the various chemicals that these products
contain. Many individuals are unaware that cosmetics often include
a multitude of chemicals, each with its speciﬁc purpose. Some of
these chemicals can pose risks to our health and the environment.
Although not every chemical in cosmetics is harmful, it is crucial to
understand the ingredients in the products we use. Opting for
products with natural or organic ingredients when possible is a
good practice. By educating ourselves about the common chemicals
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
07
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 8 ===
in cosmetics, we can make more informed decisions and take
proactive
measures
to
protect
both
our
health
and
the
environment
(National
Institute
of
Environmental
Health
Sciences, 2007; Scientiﬁc Committee on Consumer Safety, 2021).
The usage of substances with preservative action, surfactants,
perfumes, stains, etc., has expanded today due to innovation,
research, and the development of new cosmetic goods (Park,
2023). These ingredients improve the caliber, functionality, and
shelf life of cosmetic formulations, but many of them also pose a risk
to human health due to frequent, prolonged, and indiscriminate
exposure (Whitacre, 2015). Several organizations on a global scale
govern the manufacture, quality control, and safety of cosmetic
items (European Union, 2009; UNI EN ISO 22716, 2014; Boyer et al.,
2017; Sherrow, 2018). These organizations are in charge of
modifying
the
standards
and
recommendations
for
the
population’s safe and healthy use of these products while
reducing health hazards (Scientiﬁc Committee on Consumer
Safety, 2021).
Various organizations, including government agencies (GAO,
2009; Raymond and Krupnick, 2016; Practices et al., 2021),
environmental groups (Asfaw et al., 2017), research institutions
(Ananthapavan et al., 2021), and industry associations (Ricardo,
2021), may conduct cost-beneﬁt analyses (CBAs) or control CBAs
related to toxic ingredients and their impacts on human health and
the environment (Arct and Mieloch, 2020). These analyses aim to
assess the economic costs and beneﬁts associated with the use of
toxic ingredients in products and their potential adverse effects on
human health. For example, they may assess the costs and beneﬁts of
implementing
stricter
regulations
or
bans
on
certain
toxic
substances to protect public health.
Cost-beneﬁt analysis plays a crucial role in decision-making
processes related to toxic ingredients and their impacts on human
health and the environment. By quantifying the economic costs and
beneﬁts of different policy options or management strategies, CBAs
help
stakeholders
make
informed
decisions
that
balance
environmental
protection,
public
health,
and
economic
considerations (Ricardo, 2021).
However, no single organization controls the cost-beneﬁt
analysis and ensures user safety when harmful compounds are
added to cosmetic items (Barthe et al., 2021).
In the creation of numerous cosmetic goods around the world,
several compounds have the potential to be hazardous to both
human health and the environment. We also looked at potential
health issues associated with cosmetic use and its harmful
ingredients.
Cosmetic
products
like
creams,
lotions,
soaps,
lipsticks,
mascaras, eye shadows, nail polishes, shampoos, hair dyes,
sprays, gels, deodorants, and fragrances may contain ingredients
such as triclosan, parabens, phthalates, sodium lauryl sulfate or
sodium laureth sulfate (SLS or SLES), mineral oil, formaldehyde, and
butylated compounds like butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) or
butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) (Ad and Mn, 2019; Barabasz
et
al.,
2019;
Scott
Faber,
2020).
About
12,500
industrial
chemicals,
including
carcinogens,
insecticides,
reproductive
poisons,
endocrine
disruptors,
plasticizers,
degreasers,
and
surfactants, were identiﬁed by U.S. researchers as being used as
cosmetic additives (Naveed, 2014; Sheikh AG, 2018; Lauren, 2019).
According to the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR), an estimated
12,500 chemicals are used in cosmetics in the U.S. Only 11 of these
chemicals are prohibited in the U.S. Still, more than 1,300 are
banned or restricted in the E.U. (Milman, 2019) Several types of
cosmetics have been identiﬁed to contain aluminum, a lightweight
metal, in addition to heavy metals like lead, mercury, cadmium,
arsenic, and nickel. These metals are commonly found in color
cosmetics, face and body care products, hair cosmetics, herbal
cosmetics, and similar items (Kader Mohiuddin, 2019). For a
variety of reasons, heavy metals are also added to cosmetics. It is
commonly known that heavy metals are harmful (Siti Zulaikha
et al., 2015).
3.10 Environmental and health effects
of cosmetics
3.10.1 Health effects of cosmetics
Cosmetic
compounds
are
emerging
environmental
contaminants that are hazardous to human health (Juliano and
Magrini, 2017).
People encounter toxic metals through multiple exposure
pathways. Many consumers use these products daily and thereby
expose themselves to the risk of these toxic metals. Numerous
studies have shown that cosmetics components may harm the
environment
(Juliano
and
Magrini,
2017;
Issac
and
Kandasubramanian,
2021; Young, 2022) and human health
(Okereke et al., 2015; Nduka and Kelle, 2018; Ad and Mn, 2019).
It has been documented that the use of cosmetics can cause cancer,
mutation, reproductive damage, and endocrine disruption (Amasa
et al., 2012). Some chemicals used in personal care products can
negatively affect the hormone system, even at low concentrations
(Vandenberg
et
al.,
2012;
NYS
Health
Foundation,
2013).
Endocrine-disrupting substances like parabens and phthalates
may
be
most
dangerous
during
fetal
and
early
postnatal
development when organ and neurological systems are forming
(Francisco et al., 2012; Nassan et al., 2017; Bouyssi-Kobar et al.,
2019; Adegoke et al., 2021). Endocrine disorders and several types of
cancer have been related to exposure to these substances. For
instance, endocrine disruptors have been associated with breast
cancer since it is known that they alter how women’s bodies use
estrogen. Endocrine disruptors have also been linked to immune
system damage, which increases susceptibility to health problems
(Adegoke et al., 2021). Many cosmetics have also been connected to
severe hazards like infections and burns (Biskanaki et al., 2023). Hair
loss, blisters, nosebleeds, bleeding gums, and a loss of taste and smell
have all been connected to formaldehyde-based on “keratin
treatments,” which are used to straighten hair (Scott Fabber,
2020). Plenty of proof exists indicating that personal care items
are tainted with heavy metals, as reported by Siti Zulaikha and co-
authors in 2015, along with supporting visual data (Siti Zulaikha
et al., 2015).
More than 10,000 chemicals can be found in cosmetic products
(Kaličanin and Velimirović, 2016). The European Union has stricter
rules, and its precautionary approach recognizes that substances
linked to cancer and birth abnormalities are not allowed to be added
to cosmetics. A total of 1,328 substances known or suspected of
causing cancer, genetic mutation, reproductive damage, or birth
defects are prohibited from cosmetics under E.U. regulation.
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
08
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 9 ===
Comparatively, the U.S. FDA has only forbidden or limited the use
of 11 substances in cosmetics. European Union legislation, in
contrast
to
American
law,
mandates
pre-market
safety
evaluations of cosmetics, mandatory registration of cosmetic
products, government approval for the use of nanomaterials, and
outlaws the use of animals in cosmetic testing (European Union,
2009; FDA, 2022; Onel et al., 2019; Gautam et al., 2022).
Heavy metals such as lead, arsenic, mercury, aluminum, zinc,
chromium, and iron are found in various personal care products like
lipstick, whitening toothpaste, eyeliner, and nail polish (Siti Zulaikha
et al., 2015). While some metals are added deliberately as
ingredients, others appear as contaminants. These metals pose
signiﬁcant risks to human health and the environment.
Lead: Lead exposure from cosmetics has been linked to various
health
issues,
including
developmental
delays
in
children,
reproductive problems (Environmental, 2019), and neurological
damage. Chronic exposure to lead can lead to kidney damage,
hypertension, and impaired cognitive function.
Mercury: Mercury is a potent neurotoxin that can accumulate in
the body over time, leading to neurological disorders, kidney
damage, and skin rashes. Prolonged mercury exposure can also
impair cognitive function and affect fetal development in pregnant
women (EPA, 2001).
Cadmium: Cadmium exposure from cosmetics has been
associated with lung damage, kidney dysfunction, and bone
disorders. Long-term exposure to cadmium may increase the risk
of cancer and disrupt hormonal balance in the body (Ramelli et al.,
2012; Genchi et al., 2020; Charkiewicz et al., 2023).
Arsenic: Arsenic is a carcinogen that can cause skin lesions,
respiratory issues, and cardiovascular problems. Chronic exposure
to arsenic has been linked to various types of cancer, including skin,
lung, bladder, and liver cancer (Palma-Lara et al., 2020; Speer
et al., 2023).
The presence of these toxic metals in synthetic cosmetics
highlights the importance of rigorous testing and regulation to
ensure product safety and protect consumer health. Consumers
should be aware of the potential risks associated with certain
ingredients and prioritize products that are certiﬁed to meet
safety standards (Canada, 2007).
3.10.2 Safety assessment of ingredients
in cosmetics
Impurities such as heavy metals are frequently found in cosmetic
and personal care products. This explains why the concentration of
heavy metals found in the products was so low. Their presence in
cosmetics
does
not
necessitate
their
labeling
as
product
contaminants. Even if the harmful metals were only present in
trace amounts, they are known to accumulate and cause poisoning.
If permitted to build up over time, the gradual release of these metals
into the human body could be detrimental to the biological system.
Because of these metals’ lengthy half-lives, they may build up in the
body’s
organs.
The
uncertainty
factor
is
applied
to
risk
characterization in the last stage of the safety assessment of
cosmetic compounds. The MoS is the name given to this
uncertainty factor.
The World Health Organization (WHO) generally considers a
margin MoS value of 100 as a benchmark for determining the safe
use of a substance (Siti Zulaikha et al., 2015).
3.11 Carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risk
analysis of different harmful substances
found in various types of cosmetics
3.11.1 Non-carcinogenic analysis
Health risks associated with heavy metals are assessed by
estimating
risk
levels
and
categorizing
them
as
either
carcinogenic or non-carcinogenic hazards. So, the hazard index
(HI), Systemic Exposure Dosage (SED), and MoS were used to
estimate the non-cancer health risks of different harmful substances
found in various types of cosmetics.
To assess non-carcinogenic risk, especially from exposure to
chemicals, two primary metrics are used: the Hazard Quotient (HQ)
and HI. These are commonly applied in human health risk
assessments (Nduka et al., 2016; Eticha et al., 2018b; Arshad
et al., 2020). The HQ value < 1 is considered to be safe while
that greater than 1 is unsafe for human health. The HQ level was
calculated using Equation 1.
Hazard Quotient (HQ): is used to estimate the risk of non-
carcinogenic effects from a single substance.
HQ  SED
RfD
(1)
The SED value was calculated by an expression:
SED
mg
kg
d

  Cs × AA × SSA × F × RF × BF
BW
× 10−3
(2)
where, Reference Dose (RfD): is the maximum acceptable oral dose
of toxic substance, established by a regulatory agency like EPA. It
represents a daily exposure level that is assumed to be without
signiﬁcant risk of adverse effects on life. SED is the systematic
exposure dose, Cs indicates metal concentration in the sample
(mg/kg), SSA is the surface area of skin onto which the product
is applied (cm2), AA shows the quantity applied (g/cm2), RF is the
retention factor, F indicates the application frequency of a product/
day, BF is the bioaccessibility factor, 10−3 (mg/kg) is used as unit
conversion factor, BW is the average body weight (70 kg) (Eticha
et al., 2018b; Arshad et al., 2020).
HI: is used to estimate the risk of non-carcinogenic effects from
exposure to multiple chemical substances (Equation 3) (Eticha et al.,
2018b; Arshad et al., 2020). It is the sum of the Hazard Quotient for
all chemicals considered.
HI   HQi
(3)
HQi: The Hazard Quotient for each chemical.
The HI value in sample hydroalcoholic gel samples tested in the
study is less than 1. The HI levels were much less than 1, meaning
that the samples were safe for human health (Arshad et al., 2020).
The study conducted on Health Risk Assessment of some Cosmetic
Products sold in KefﬁMarkets, Nasarawa State Nigeria revealed that
HI, pressed powder, dental powder, eye shadow, and eyeliner, 9.61 ×
03, 6.0 × 104, 7.2 × 106, and 1.0 × 109 respectively. Results are in
agreement with those reported by Health Canada (2016). HI levels
for the lotion and sunblock were greater than 1 at both 50% and
100% bio-accessibility, which demonstrated that excessive use of
these products may cause health risks to consumers. In the case of
hair dye, foundation, whitening cream, and lipstick, HI values
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
09
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 10 ===
reported by Abed Elaziz et al. (2016) were also less than 1 for
different facial cosmetics.
3.11.2 Carcinogenic analysis
The carcinogenic analysis is realized by the evaluation of the
probable cancer risks due to exposure to heavy metals. The ILCR is
the incremental probability of a person developing any type of
cancer over a lifetime as a result of 24 h per day exposure to a given
daily amount of a carcinogenic element for 70 years. The permissible
limits of ILCR for one or more heavy metals are 10−6 < ILCR <10−4
and computed as reported previously (Equation 4) (Arshad
et al., 2020).
LCR  SED × SF
(4)
where SF represents the carcinogenicity slope factor (mg/kg/d)/-
1 and it approximates the cancer risk per unit intake dose of an agent
to cause cancer over an average lifetime.
The study conducted (Gnonsoro et al., 2022) on Health Risk
Assessment of Heavy Metals (Pb, Cd, Hg) in Hydroalcoholic Gels of
Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire depicted that the mean values of ILCR for
lead and cadmium are 2.59 × 10−8 ± 1.15 × 10−8 and 4.78 × 10−9 ±
1.56 × 10−9 respectively. For a single heavy metal, an ILCR below 1 ×
10−6 poses an insigniﬁcant cancer risk and can be disregarded,
whereas an ILCR exciding 1 × 10−4 signals a signiﬁcant health
concern due to the heightened risk of cancer. Therefore, the
hydroalcoholic gel samples tested in the study did not pose
a
carcinogenic
risk
through
dermal
sensitivity
for
lead
and cadmium.
In the context of cosmetic products, assessing carcinogenic risk
involves analyzing exposure through ingestion, inhalation, and
dermal contact.
Ingestion of cosmetic products generally occurs through
incidental ingestion of lip products or accidental ingestion by
children. This pathway necessitates careful calculation of doses
based on product usage and the concentration of harmful
substances, coupled with regulatory measures to limit such
substances in lip and oral care products (FDA, 2022; Salles
et al., 2023).
Inhalation exposure is signiﬁcant for aerosolized products like
sprays, powders, and perfumes. Here, risk factors include the
concentration of airborne particles, the frequency of use, and
environmental
ventilation.
Proper
risk
assessment
involves
estimating
inhalation
rates
and
using
inhalation-speciﬁc
toxicological data, with mitigation strategies such as regulating
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and promoting safe usage
practices (Oh and Kim, 2020; SCCS, 2023).
Dermal contact is the primary exposure pathway for most
cosmetics, which are applied directly to the skin. This involves
considering skin permeability, product formulation, and application
frequency. The risk is assessed by evaluating the product’s
concentration, the surface area exposed, and absorption rates,
with regulatory measures ensuring the exclusion of known
carcinogens and comprehensive safety testing of ingredients
(Chedik et al., 2024).
Integrating
these
pathways
into
a
comprehensive
risk
assessment allows for a complete understanding of carcinogenic
risks associated with cosmetics, ensuring products meet safety
standards
and
maintain
consumer
safety
and
conﬁdence
(Canavez et al., 2021; Canada, 2007).
Maximum Allowed Limit: Regulatory limits for hazardous
metals in various cosmetic products as speciﬁed by different
health agencies.
Lead (Pb) and Cadmium (Cd) are common hazardous metals
found in synthetic cosmetics. Table 1 provides examples of these
metals
in
various
cosmetic
products
and
their
associated
carcinogenic risk assessments.
Including speciﬁc examples of carcinogenic risk assessments for
hazardous metals in synthetic cosmetics enhances the study’s
relevance. It provides a clear, detailed understanding of the
potential carcinogenic risks and regulatory standards, helping to
inform both consumers and regulatory bodies about the safety of
cosmetic products.
Table
2
also
suggests
that
certain
cosmetics,
especially
eyeshadow, and lipstick, have relatively high HI values for certain
metals, indicating a potential risk of adverse health effects from
exposure to these metals through cosmetics. This suggests the need
for
further
assessment
and
possibly
regulation
to
ensure
consumer safety.
The SED predicts the number of chemicals that enter the human
body by various exposure means and is computed as Equation 2
(Arshad et al., 2020).
According to the study conducted by Eticha et al. (2018a), on the
determination of levels and exposure risks of metals in lipsticks, the
result revealed that the calculated SED (μg/kg bw/day) and MoS of
heavy metals from the lipstick products. The SED of cadmium and
zinc from the samples ranged from 7.98 × 10−8 to 1.61 × 10−6, and
4.02 × 10–5 to 8.04 × 10−5 μg/kg bw/day for 50% and 100%
bioaccessibility scenarios (Eticha et al., 2018a).
The study done in Nigeria on Concentrations and exposure risks
of some metals in facial cosmetics indicates the SED of cadmium,
lead, and chromium in lipstick samples in the range of 1.96 × 10−5 to
3.92 × 10−5, 6.61 × 10–5 to 1.13 × 10–4, and 5.43 × 10–5 to 1.09 × 10–4
μg/kg bw/day respectively at both 50% and 100% bioaccessibility
(Iwegbue et al., 2016).
At 50% and 100% bioaccessibility, the MoS for cadmium and
zinc chromium in lipsticks are 5.10 × 106 to 2.55 × 106, 3.72 × 108 to
1.86 × 108, and 5.53 × 106 to 2.76 × 106, respectively (Iwegbue et al.,
2016). The MoS for zinc and cadmium in lipsticks at 50% and 100%
bioaccessibility, respectively, is 2.49 × 106 to 1.24 × 106 and 1.25 × 109
to 6.27 × 108, according to (Eticha et al., 2018a). Nonetheless, the
World Health Organization (WHO) states that a product’s MoS
value is safe to use if it is greater than 100 and that a value up to 100 is
acceptable (Iwegbue et al., 2016; Eticha et al., 2018a; Arshad
et al., 2020).
Another study suggests that in the samples of hair dye,
foundation, whitening cream, and lipstick MoS was greater than
100, which revealed that the evaluated samples were safe for use.
However, in lotions and sun-blocks- blocks the MoS values for Cd,
Cr, and Pb were below 100, which indicated that these products are
not safe for use, particularly concerning Heavy metal contamination.
In different cosmetic products analyzed (Usman et al., 2021) levels of
MoS were found to be higher than 100 while MoS for lipsticks was
almost similar to the previous study as reported by Arshad et al.
(2020) (Equation 5).
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
10
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 11 ===
MOS  NOAEL
SED
(5)
Nevertheless, if the amount of metal in the samples is above the
WHO’s recommended threshold of 100, which indicates that a
material is acceptable for use, continued use of the products may
cause these metals to accumulate to dangerously high levels in the
human body. It is advised that regular monitoring systems and the
establishment of maximum allowable levels for heavy metals in
cosmetic products be put in place to mitigate any potential dangers
to human health linked with the use of cosmetics.
The analysis suggests that while these harmful substances are
present
in cosmetics,
the risks
associated
with their non-
carcinogenic and carcinogenic exposure are relatively low when
used as directed. However, it’s essential to consider cumulative
exposure from multiple sources and potential synergistic effects
when evaluating overall risk. Additionally, continuous monitoring
and regulatory oversight are crucial to ensuring the safety of
cosmetic products.
The values in Table 2 depend on various factors such as
cosmetics brand (Arshad et al., 2020), frequency of use, exposure
pathways, and individual factors such as age and health status.
3.11.3 Environmental effects of cosmetics
Cosmetic ingredients can enter the environment through
various pathways, including but not limited to, direct discharge
(Paulsen, 2015; Tsiouli and Fytianos, 2023) from manufacturing
facilities (Juliano and Magrini, 2017) into water bodies, runoff
(Oluwole et al., 2020). from urban areas during rainfall events.,
leaching from landﬁlls (Ejeromedoghene et al., 2021; Tsiouli and
Fytianos, 2023) where cosmetic products are disposed of Yadav.
(2023), and via personal use and disposal practices such as washing
off products in sinks and showers (Tsiouli and Fytianos, 2023).
Additionally, microplastics and other solid particles from cosmetic
formulations can accumulate in soil and water bodies through
wastewater
treatment
efﬂuent
or
direct
release,
further
contributing
to
environmental
contamination
(Juliano
and
Magrini, 2017; Pereira and Pereira, 2018; David and Niculescu,
2021; Young, 2022).
The most signiﬁcant pathway for cosmetic ingredients to enter
the environment is through wastewater discharge (Khalid and
Abdollahi,
2021).
This
is
particularly
concerning
because
wastewater treatment plants may not effectively remove all
cosmetic
ingredients,
leading
to
their
release
into
aquatic
environments (Juliano and Magrini, 2017). Once in aquatic
systems,
these
compounds
can
persist,
bioaccumulate,
and
biomagnify through the food chain (Li et al., 2023). They can
also transform more harmful substances through processes like
photolysis and oxidation. Ultimately, many of these compounds
end up in water bodies such as rivers, lakes, and oceans, where they
can have adverse effects on aquatic ecosystems and potentially enter
the human food chain through seafood consumption (Ghosh et al.,
2023; Osman et al., 2023).
They discharge into the atmosphere, water, and soil throughout
the production process, posing major environmental dangers.
According to a US Government Accountability Ofﬁce review,
nanoparticles
with
antibacterial
capabilities
that
are
never
provided in large enough numbers may interfere with the
beneﬁcial activity of microorganisms in water treatment facilities
and render the suggested water for reuse ineffective. Titanium
dioxide nanoparticles used for disinfection and to break down
contaminants
may
also
be
able
to
drive
other
organic
transformations
and
have
an
impact
on
atmospheric
photochemical
processes.
Similarly,
a
study
done
by
the
University of Toledo discovered that nano-TiO2, a substance that
is thought to be near home, lowered the organic processes of
microorganisms after an hour of exposure. As a result, it has
been proposed that these particles, which wind up at civic sewage
treatment plants, might damage creatures that are essential to
maintaining the ecosystem (Gupta et al., 2022).
The efﬂuents from wastewater treatment plants and sewage
sludge, which are frequently used as a fertilizer, are probably the
most signiﬁcant sources of pollution. Ultraviolet ﬁlters (UVFs),
often used in the production of cosmetics, can directly enter
water bodies when washed off the skin during recreational
activities such as swimming, or bathing, as well as indirectly
through wastewater from the use of personal care products,
washing
clothes,
and
industrial
discharges
(Juliano
and
Magrini, 2017).
Ultraviolet ﬁlters (UVFs) are chemicals used in sunscreens and
other cosmetics to protect the skin from harmful ultraviolet
radiation. Common UV ﬁlters include oxybenzone, octinoxate,
and avobenzone.
Ecological risk assessment (ERA) of UV ﬁlters, such as
oxybenzone, octinoxate, and avobenzone, is a critical area of
study due to their widespread use in sunscreens and personal
care products. These chemicals are designed to absorb or reﬂect
UV radiation, protecting human skin from harmful effects.
However, their release into the environment through activities
such as swimming, bathing, and wastewater discharge raises
signiﬁcant ecological concerns.
Ultraviolet ﬁlters can be highly toxic to various aquatic
organisms. For example, oxybenzone has been shown to cause
coral bleaching by promoting viral infections in coral cells,
disrupting their symbiotic relationship with algae. This can lead
to the loss of coral reefs, which are crucial for marine biodiversity
(Wood, 2018; Miller et al., 2021; Mozas-Blanco et al., 2023).
Similarly, octinoxate has been found to cause developmental
issues in ﬁsh and invertebrates, impacting reproduction and
population dynamics (Schlumpf et al., 2008).
Many UV ﬁlters are lipophilic, meaning they can accumulate in
the fatty tissues of aquatic organisms. This bioaccumulation can lead
to biomagniﬁcation up the food chain, posing risks to predators,
including birds and mammals that consume contaminated ﬁsh and
invertebrates. Persistent UV ﬁlters can remain in the environment
for extended periods, further exacerbating their ecological impact
(Peng et al., 2017).
Several UV ﬁlters have been identiﬁed as endocrine disruptors
(Table 3). They can interfere with the hormonal systems of aquatic
organisms, leading to altered reproductive behaviors, growth
patterns, and developmental processes. For instance, studies have
shown that UV ﬁlters like 4-MBC (4-methylbenzylidene camphor)
can affect the endocrine system of ﬁsh, leading to decreased fertility
and altered sex ratios (Wang et al., 2016; He et al., 2021).
Parabens, commonly used as preservatives in cosmetics to
inhibit microbial growth, include methylparaben, ethylparaben,
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
11
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 12 ===
and butylparaben. These substances can enter aquatic systems via
wastewater, where they pose toxic risks to various forms of aquatic
life such as algae, crustaceans, and ﬁsh. The endocrine systems of
these organisms can be disrupted by parabens, causing reproductive
and developmental issues (Mozas-Blanco et al., 2023). Despite being
biodegradable, the pervasive use and continual release of parabens
result in their accumulation in the environment, creating long-term
ecological risks (Mozas-Blanco et al., 2023).
Triclosan, an antimicrobial agent found in numerous personal
care products like soaps, toothpaste, and deodorants, poses
environmental
risks
(Table
3).
It
can
persist
in
aquatic
environments, where its presence is toxic, leading to signiﬁcant
water contamination issues (Al et al., 2016).
3.11.3.1 Air pollution
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are air pollutants
found in various cosmetics, including fragrances, deodorants,
hair sprays, hair mousses, hair styling gels, nail paint removers,
shaving creams, and antiperspirants (Lisa and Benson, 2017;
USEPA, 2021). According to a recent study, these goods
considerably
contribute
to
carbon
dioxide
emissions
(McDonald et al., 2018). The study found that half of the
VOCs released in 33 major cities come from household and
cosmetic goods. One study discovered that, in some situations,
the VOC from deodorants, hairsprays, and fragrances emit the
same quantity of chemical vapors as autos. However, it was
noted that the balanced ratio was more a result of decreased
pollution from automobiles than increased pollution from
cosmetics (McDonald et al., 2018). Let’s not overlook the
environmental
impact
of
the
numerous
components
produced from fossil fuels that are used in packaging and
beauty products. Carbon pollution is a signiﬁcant concern
even when natural ingredients are extracted and processed in
non-sustainable methods.
TABLE 1 Health risk assessment of hazardous metals in synthetic cosmetics.
Hazardous
metal
Example
product
Maximum allowed limit
Incremental lifetime cancer
risk (ILCR)
References
Lead (Pb)
Lip Products
10 ppm
2.59 × 10−8 ± 1.15 × 10−8
Gnonsoro et al.
(2022)
Lead (Pb)
Eye Pencil, Lipstick,
Tattoo
10 ppm in lip products; 3 μg/g for eye pencil,
lipstick, and tattoo
2.59 × 10−8 ± 1.15 × 10−8
Health Canada
(2007)
Cadmium (Cd)
Eye Pencil, Lipstick,
Tattoo
3 μg/g
4.78 × 10−9 ± 1.56 × 10−9
Gnonsoro et al.
(2022)
Lead (Pb)
Various Cosmetics
Not speciﬁed
2.59 × 10−8 ± 1.15 × 10−8
Gnonsoro et al.
(2022)
Cadmium (Cd)
Various Cosmetics
Not speciﬁed
4.78 × 10−9 ± 1.56 × 10−9
Gnonsoro et al.
(2022)
TABLE 2 MoS, SED, and HQ value of some toxic metal ingredients present in cosmetics products.
Toxic metal ingredients
Type of cosmetic
MoS
SED
HQ
References
Cd
Lipstick
2.55 × 106
3.92 × 10−5
3.5
Iwegbue et al. (2016), Tunde (2024)
Eyeshadow (mg/kg/d)
2.37 × 107
2.11 × 10−10
1.6
Guerranti et al. (2022), Albugami et al. (2024)
Lotion (mg/kg/d)
1.13 × 101
4.41 × 10−2
0.59
Arshad et al. (2020)
Pb
Lipstick
3.02 × 106
1.32 × 10−4
5
Tunde, 2024; Li et al. (2021)
Dental powder (μg kg-1dw day-1)
2.41
0.1658
Ibrahim et al. (2019)
Eyeshadow (mg/kg/d)
5.39 × 108
1.48 × 10−8
3.2
Guerranti et al. (2022), Albugami et al. (2024)
Lotion (mg/kg/d)
8.71 × 101
4.82 × 10−1
1.30
Arshad et al. (2020)
Cr
Lipstick
2.76 × 106
1.09 × 10−4
4
Iwegbue et al. (2016), Tunde et al. (2024)
Dental powder (μg kg-1dw day-1)
6.59
0.0455
Ibrahim et al. (2019)
Eyeshadow (mg/kg/d)
1.05 × 104
2.38 × 10−4
7.93 × 10−2
Guerranti et al. (2022)
Lotion (mg/kg/d)
3.09 × 101
4.86 × 10−2
0.28
Arshad et al. (2020)
Ni
Lipstick
9.29 × 106
2.15 × 10−4
5
Iwegbue et al. (2016), Tunde et al. (2024)
Eyeshadow (mg/kg/d)
2.65 × 106
8.29 × 10−7
4.14 × 10−5
Guerranti et al. (2022)
Lotion (mg/kg/d)
1.21 × 103
4.45 × 10−1
0.90
Arshad et al. (2020)
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
12
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 13 ===
TABLE 3 Cosmetic ingredients and their health effect.
Toxin
Personal care products
containing toxin
Health effect
References
Triclosan
Deodorants, mouthwash, hand sanitizer,
shaving cream, soaps, fragrances, and
toothpaste
Liver ﬁbrosis, triclosan-resistant bacteria,
immune system impairment, endocrine
disruptor, thyroid function, thyroid
homeostasis, and immunological response
impairment
There may be a negative impact on the
human immune system because high urine
triclosan levels are associated with a higher
prevalence of allergies and hay fever in
youngsters. Cancer-causing factors
NYS Health Foundation (2013), Yueh
and Tukey (2016), Weatherly and Gosse
(2017), Ray et al. (2020); Scott (2020)
Parabens and their compound
(methylparaben, ethylparaben,
propylparaben, butylparaben,
isopropylparaben, isobutylparaben)
Creams, lotions, lipsticks, other wet
cosmetics, powders, antiperspirants, and
perfumes
Parabens can potentially be endocrine
disruptors and may have immunological or
allergic consequences. Human breast
cancer cells are shown to become more
migratory and aggressive when exposed to
parabens in vitro. High urine paraben
concentrations have also been linked
statistically to sperm DNA damage and
promote cancerogenic and reduced
amounts of reproductive hormones in men
Prusakiewicz et al. (2007), NYS Health
Foundation (2013), Barabasz et al.
(2019), Ray et al. (2020)
Formaldehyde
Nail polish, nail glue, eyelash glue, hair
gel, hair-smoothing products, baby
shampoo, body soap, body wash, and
color cosmetics
The National Toxicology Program has
designated formaldehyde as a substance
known to cause cancer in humans.
Nasopharyngeal, sinonasal, and
lymphohematopoietic cancers, particularly
myeloid leukemia, have all been related to
occupational exposure, mainly through
respiratory pathways. Causes allergic
reactions and eye and respiratory system
irritation. Exposure to formaldehyde has
been linked to cancer-causing effects and
reproductive impacts such as spontaneous
abortions, congenital abnormalities, low
birth weights, and endometriosis
Department of Health and Human
Services (2016), Sheikh AG (2018), Scott
Faber (2020)
Toluene
Toluene is a solvent used in nail polish,
nail treatment, hair dyes
High amounts can cause upper respiratory
tract irritation, central nervous system
depression, and neurobehavioral
impairment in humans. Massive exposure
may result in ﬂuid buildup in the lungs and
respiratory arrest. Toluene affects the
developing fetus and is hazardous to the
brain and neurological system
NYS Health Foundation (2013), Scott
Faber (2020)
Phenol
Soap, cleaning lotions
Skin corrosive, impact tumor promoter,
local tissue irritation, irregular heartbeat,
vomiting, darker urine, liver damage,
damage to blood-forming organs, collapse,
cause mutagenic and cancerogenic
Ray et al. (2020)
UV ﬁlters and Benzophenone-4
Sunscreens, soap, shampoos,
antiperspirants and hair sprays
The harmful impact on reproduction and
development, hormonal disorders, and
endocrine disruption
Sharifan and Morse. (2016), Ray et al.
(2020)
Phthalates/its compounds (dibutyl
phthalate (DBP), Di-2-ethyl hexyl
phthalate (DEHP), Diethyl
phthalate (DEP))
Color cosmetics, fragranced lotions, body
washes, hair care products, nail polish
Disrupt the endocrine system in the human
reproductive system, adult men’s sperm
DNA damage from exposure to some
phthalates has also been connected
NYS Health Foundation (2013),
Mesquita et al. (2021)
Butylated compounds (BHA (butylated
hydroxylanisole), BHT (butylated
hydroxyl toluene))
Lip products, hair products, makeup,
sunscreen, antiperspirant/deodorant,
fragrance, creams
Cancer, irritability, toxicology of the
reproductive and developmental systems,
and disruption of the endocrine system.
The National Toxicology Program
classiﬁes BHA as “reasonably presumed to
be a human carcinogen.”
Department of Health and Human
Services (2016), Ad and Mn (2019),
Made Safe (2022)
(Continued on following page)
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
13
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 14 ===
TABLE 3 (Continued) Cosmetic ingredients and their health effect.
Toxin
Personal care products
containing toxin
Health effect
References
1,4-dioxane
shampoo, liquid soap, bubble bath), hair
relaxers
The EPA has classiﬁed 1,4-Dioxane, which
is produced as a byproduct during
production, as a “probable human
carcinogen.” Also noted were organ
toxicity and inﬂammation
Group (2007), NYS Health Foundation
(2013)
Carbon black
A pigment used in eyeliner, mascara, nail
polish, eye shadow, brush-on-brow,
lipstick, blushers, rouge, makeup, and
foundation
Increases the likelihood of developing lung
illness, the prevalence of cardiovascular
disease, and induces cancerous growth
Scott (2020)
19 20, 21
per- and poly-ﬂuoroalkyl substances
sunscreen, foundation, concealer,
eyeliner, shaving cream, and hairspray
Injure the unborn child, raise the chance of
cancer, compromise the immune system,
and mess with hormones
Scott Faber (2020)
Polyethylene Glycols (PEGs)
used in creams
Genotoxicity and systemic toxicity are
possible side effects when used on damaged
skin
Ad and Mn (2019)
Petrolatum
used in hair care products to make
they shine
Petrolatum may contain polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which
could be linked to cancer, allergies, and
skin irritability
Ad and Mn (2019)
Sodium Lauryl Sulfate (SLS)
toothpaste, shampoos, and lotions
Patients with some types of ulcers may
experience longer and more discomfort
due to human exposure to 1,4-Dioxane
contamination. It is regarded as a lung,
skin, and eye irritant, and liver cells, heart
muscles, and brain cells are all damaged. It
messes with the immune system, affects the
eye muscle, and triggers allergic skin
reactions. When combined with other
chemicals, it is highly reactive and
produces molecules that cause cancer
NYS Health Foundation (2013), Sheikh
AG (2018)
Siloxanes
Deodorant creams
As an endocrine disruptor that interferes
with the action of human hormones and a
potential reproductive toxin,
cyclotetrasiloxane may reduce human
fertility
Okereke et al. (2015)
Lead and related compounds
Lipstick, eye shadow, blush, powders,
shampoos, and lotions
It may also impact the reproductive system
because it is hepatotoxic, neurotoxic, and
nephrotoxic. The system is a potential
human carcinogen that affects circulatory
and heart health and fetal development
through the placenta
Scott Faber (2020), Attard and Abstract
(2022)
Mercury and related compounds
Skin-lightening creams and soaps
Symptoms of kidney damage include skin
rashes, discoloration, scarring, decreased
skin resistance to bacterial and fungal
infections, anxiety, sadness, and psychosis.
Peripheral neuropathy is another side
effect, and the developing fetus is
particularly affected. When pregnant
women eat seafood that contains
methylmercury, the mercury can pass from
the mother to her infant through breast
milk, potentially causing
neurodevelopmental impairments to the
child
Zero Mercury Working Group (2010),
WHO, (2011); Scott Faber (2020)
(Continued on following page)
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
14
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 15 ===
3.11.3.2 Water pollution
Toxic chemicals in beauty products leach from our bodies
into the oceans, from our bathrooms to spending hot summer
days at the beach. Sometimes dangerous compounds are found in
shampoos, sunscreens, creams, and lotions that end up in the
environment and endanger wildlife. Every year, 14,000 tons of
sunscreen end up in the water and on coral reefs. The immense
devastation of coral reefs in the world’s oceans is caused in
part by oxybenzone. It has been discovered that chemical
additives, such as butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), sodium
lauryl sulfate, and butylated hydroxy anisole (BHA), can
signiﬁcantly alter the biochemistry of aquatic life. These
poisonous compounds sometimes kill ﬁsh, in addition to
reducing the animal plankton population. Some of these
pollutants remain in the water supply even after sewage
treatment (Barabasz et al., 2019).
3.11.3.3 Microbeads
The presence of microplastics in the marine environment is a
problem that is receiving more attention and is now acknowledged
as one of the growing concerns since it could harm animals and
pose hazards to the health of marine ecosystems. Additionally,
early research has shown that microplastics are widely distributed
in much inland water, with a higher concentration than in the
coastal environment (Wu et al., 2018). Microplastics have become
prevalent environmental contaminants in both freshwater and
marine ecosystems (Limonta et al., 2019). Plastic packaging is
only one component of the plastic pollution brought on by beauty
products. Plastic microbeads are used as exfoliants in body scrubs
and other beauty treatments, and they are little plastic ﬂecks no
larger
than
5
mm
(Issac
and
Kandasubramanian,
2021).
Innumerable
microplastics
ﬂush
into
water
bodies
when
products
that
contain
microbeads
are
used.
They
draw
pollutants in when ﬁsh ingest them and ﬁnally by people.
Microbeads exacerbate the
already severe plastic pollution
problems in the world’s oceans. Although the U.S. and the U.K.
have outlawed microbead production, they still come across them
in some products. Nothing prevents cosmetic ﬁrms operating in
nations without microbead regulations from utilizing hazardous
plastic (Young, 2022).
3.11.3.4 Unsustainable resource consumption
Cosmetics products seriously deplete natural resources. For
instance, palm oil, a plant-based ingredient, can be found in
more than 2,300 cosmetic products (under 20 various names)
(Young, 2022). Only tropical regions within 10 degrees of the
equator support the growth of palm oil. Between 2015 and 2018,
vendors in Southeast Asia alone cleared 500 square miles of
rainforest due to rising demand for the commodity (Final
Countdown, 2018). Deforestation frequently occurs using ﬁre,
which releases tons of carbon dioxide, much more than the trees
sequester. Moreover, primates are undoubtedly the direct victims of
the widespread degradation of rainforests caused by palm oil.
According
to
Orangutan
Foundation
International,
between
1,000 and 5,000 orangutans are murdered annually in palm oil
concessions (Orangutan Foundation International, 2015). The mica
mining sector is rife with deforestation as well. The mineral is
frequently used to give cosmetics a shine for 4,249 of the goods
evaluated by the Environmental Working Group (EWG), including
lipsticks and eye shadows (Singh, 2019). Furthermore, two of the
world’s most disadvantaged and underpaid individuals work in both
industries, palm oil, and mica extraction from the ground. The
processes used in mining, harvesting, and manufacturing require a
lot of labor and are frequently done in hazardous environments.
3.11.3.5 Transport/logistics of beauty products
The logistics and distribution of cosmetics are environmentally
detrimental as well. Many cosmetic items are manufactured abroad,
and when they are sent to international markets, a signiﬁcant carbon
footprint is left behind.
915 million tons of carbon dioxide were created by the aviation
sector in 2019 alone, accounting for roughly 2% of total CO2
emissions caused by human activity annually (Jarošová and
Pajdlhauser, 2022) These carbon emissions hasten the effects of
global warming, which causes several more environmental issues.
Customers are urged to buy their cosmetics from local vendors
or even make their own to stop this practice (Sadie, 2020).
For instance, short supply chains and transit routes can help
minimize emissions (Cherraﬁet al., 2022). Cosmetic enterprises
have to pay attention to the spread of possible invasive species
through logistical procedures and product movements (Ashdaq
TABLE 3 (Continued) Cosmetic ingredients and their health effect.
Toxin
Personal care products
containing toxin
Health effect
References
Cadmium
Lipsticks, eye shadow, eye makeup,
eyebrow pencil
In human tissues, irritant dermatitis builds
up before being gradually discharged into
the bloodstream. But often, it attaches to
keratin. The skeletal, reproductive,
metabolic, respiratory, and renal systems
are affected systemically. It may induce
oxidative stress, which can lead to human
cancer and has been linked to osteoporosis,
diabetes, lung cancer, and kidney damage.
It also accelerates the aging process of the
skin
IARC (1987), Okereke et al. (2015),
Attard and Abstract (2022)
Nickel
Eye shadow
The respiratory system is impacted by
allergens and dermatitis, increasing lung
and nose cancer risk. A human carcinogen
was also reported
Ahlström et al. (2019), Attard and
Abstract (2022)
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
15
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 16 ===
TABLE 4 Different parts of plants used as cosmetic ingredients.
Part of
plant
Speciﬁc
plant
species
Compound to be
extracted
Cosmetic application
Impact on plant
species
References
Bark
Cinnamomum
verum
Cinnamaldehyde, Eugenol,
Cinnamic Acid, Coumarin,
Polyphenols, Tannins,
Volatile Oils
antimicrobial protection,
antioxidant support, anti-
inﬂammatory effects, and skin
brightening
The loss of bark from a plant
can expose the inner tissues to
environmental stressors,
pathogens, and physical
damage. This can disrupt the
plant’s vascular system, leading
to decreased nutrient and water
transport, and ultimately
affecting its overall health and
survival
Hwang et al. (2014), Nestby (2020),
Kowalczyk et al. (2024)
Flowers
Dendrobium
Pelargonidin, sinapic, ferulic
acids
Skin ﬁrming and whitening
Flowers are crucial for plant
reproduction through
pollination. The loss of ﬂowers
can prevent the plant from
producing seeds and fruits,
impacting its ability to
reproduce and potentially
reducing genetic diversity
within the population.
Additionally, ﬂowers often
attract pollinators essential for
the reproduction of other plant
species in the ecosystem
Wang et al. (2019); Faccio (2020)
Fruit
Castanea sativa
Ellagic acid/polyphenolic
Anti-aging formulations, Skin
brightening products, Anti-
inﬂammatory creams,
Moisturizers and emollients,
Sun care products, and Hair
care products
Fruits contain seeds, which are
essential for the propagation
and dispersal of many plant
species. The loss of fruits can
hinder the plant’s ability to
reproduce and spread its
genetic material to new areas. It
can also impact the plant’s
interactions with seed-
dispersing animals, potentially
affecting the plant’s survival
and distribution
Pinto et al., (2017), Pinto et al.
(2021)
Leaves
Azadirachta indica
Nimbidin, Nimbin,
Quercetin, Nimbolinin,
Nimbinin
Anti-inﬂammatory, Anti-
bacterial, Skin-soothing,
Antioxidant, Antifungal
Leaves are crucial for
photosynthesis, the process by
which plants convert sunlight
into energy. The loss of leaves
can signiﬁcantly reduce a
plant’s ability to produce food
and energy, leading to stunted
growth, weakened defenses
against pests and diseases, and,
in severe cases, plant death
Vanderplanck et al. (2020), Haji
et al. (2023), Rodrigues et al. (2023)
Nuts
Butyrospermum
parkii
Triglycerides, Oleic Acid,
Stearic Acid, Linoleic Acid,
Tocopherols (Vitamin E),
Phytosterols, Allantoin
Moisturizers, body butters, lip
balms, hair conditioners, and
massage creams, to provide
hydration, nourishment, and
protection to the skin and hair
Nuts are seeds enclosed in a
hard shell, often dispersed by
animals. The loss of nuts can
prevent the plant from
reproducing and spreading its
seeds to new locations.
Additionally, nuts may serve as
a food source for wildlife, and
their loss can disrupt ecological
relationships within the
ecosystem
Esposito et al. (2017), Helmstetter
et al. (2020)
Pollen
Carthamus
tinctorius
Linoleic acid
Antioxidants
Pollen is essential for plant
reproduction through
pollination. The loss of pollen
can prevent fertilization and
seed production, ultimately
impacting the plant’s ability to
reproduce and maintain its
population size
Chamer et al. (2015), Bergman and
Kandel (2017), Faccio (2020)
(Continued on following page)
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
16
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 17 ===
et al., 2023). Organisms that are brought into an environment where
they do not normally reside are referred to as invasive species
(Scanes, 2017). Highly aggressive species that have no natural
rivals or predators may proliferate and endanger native species
by becoming invasive (Nikolovska, 2016). The composition and
operation of ecosystems may occasionally be disturbed by these
biological invasions, which can also have signiﬁcant ﬁnancial
consequences.
Particularly cosmetic businesses that use imported fresh and raw
plant-based materials may be vulnerable to this (Cooney, 2004). To
prevent the spread of potentially invasive alien species, businesses
should take action. You should take the precautionary principle into
account (CBD, 2002). Arriving items with biological raw materials
and fresh ingredients should always be thoroughly inspected visually
for potential stowaways (such as insects). If “contamination” is seen,
the offending organism has to be eliminated. The possible measures
are the identiﬁcation of possible gateways for potentially invasive
species in the company (i.e., goods entrance), process description
and procedure for “contaminated” material, and development of
protocols for documentation of material contamination (Gisp and
Jackson, 2007).
3.12 Risks to the biodiversity/ﬂora and fauna
of ecosystems
Loss of biodiversity is the term used to describe the reduction in
diversity within a species, an ecosystem, a region, or the planet itself
(David Elisha and Jebbin Felix, 2020). Because it undermines
ecosystems’ ability to operate and puts them in danger of
disturbance, biodiversity loss is a concern because it negatively
affects both individual animals and ecosystems as a whole
(Chandellier and Malacain, 2021). As a result, life on Earth is left
with fewer resources and is less able to satisfy its requirements.
Many cosmetic products are made using organic, plant- and
animal-derived
components
(Abattoir,
2015).
These
include
biologically derived ingredients having beneﬁcial qualities for
cosmetic applications, such as essential oils, pigments, and
surfactants. Biodiversity is becoming a key concern for the
cosmetics sector due to rising customer demand for natural
components
and
sustainable
cosmetic
products
(European
Business and Biodiversity Campaign, 2010).
The production or collection of biological raw materials often
has the greatest direct and indirect detrimental consequences on
biodiversity. The primary environmental effects include the
(indirect) use of land for resource extraction, the exploitation of
ecosystems and habitats, pesticide and fertilizer contamination, and
agricultural practices that encourage erosion (Wassie, 2020). A
conspicuous illustration of this is the continued destruction of
signiﬁcant portions of primary rainforest for the increasingly
widespread cultivation of palm oil (Murphy et al., 2021). In the
case of wild collection, the ecological sustainability of the resource
collection is reliant on the good conservation status of the employed
species and its population (Leaman, 2008). Improper harvesting
techniques or other factors might have a detrimental impact on
preservation. Factors inﬂuencing the preservation negatively are
improper harvesting methods or harvesting times as a harvesting
rate above the regeneration capacity of the species. The Candeia tree
(Eremanthus erythropappus), which produces the anti-inﬂammatory
alpha-bisabolol, which is used in several skin creams and is native to
the Amazonian rainforest, is a good example of this (Queiroz and
Cajaiba, 2016).
There is a possibility of harmful consequences on biodiversity
even at the very end of the value chains for cosmetics. For instance,
many of the cosmetics’ active components wind up in sewage water
and are incapable of being ﬁltered in typical sewage treatment
facilities (European Business and Biodiversity Campaign, 2010).
Such “Xenobiotic” (bio-incompatible) substances wind up in
TABLE 4 (Continued) Different parts of plants used as cosmetic ingredients.
Part of
plant
Speciﬁc
plant
species
Compound to be
extracted
Cosmetic application
Impact on plant
species
References
Roots
Glycyrrhiza glabra
Glycyrrhizin or licorice
anti-inﬂammatory, antioxidant,
and skin-soothing
Roots anchor the plant in the
soil and absorb water and
nutrients from the
environment. The loss of roots
can destabilize the plant,
making it more susceptible to
wind, water erosion, and
physical damage. It can also
compromise the plant’s ability
to access essential resources,
leading to decreased growth
and survival
Weryszko-Chmielewska et al.
(2012), Cerulli et al. (2022)
Seeds
Simmondsia
chinensis
jojoba oil (wax esters),
vitamin E, phytosterols,
omega-9 fatty acids, and
polyphenols
skin and hair care
Seeds are crucial for the
propagation and dispersal of
many plant species. The loss of
seeds can prevent the plant
from reproducing and
establishing new individuals in
suitable habitats, ultimately
affecting its population
dynamics and long-term
survival
Sandha and Swami (2009),
Weryszko-Chmielewska et al.
(2012), Inoti. (2017); Faccio (2020),
Gad et al. (2021)
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
17
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 18 ===
rivers and streams, where they are likely to accumulate in aquatic
creatures
and,
for
example,
impair
reproduction
(Ravindra
et al., 2019).
Since the use of materials from protected or endangered species,
as well as biological raw materials and ingredients from areas with
high biodiversity can be extremely important to the success of
cosmetic companies, corporate management should modify its
environmental policy to support the objectives of the UN
Biodiversity Convention (Lojeng, 2022).
Environment and Sustainability Managers as well as auditors
should assess to what extent the strategic importance of biodiversity
is known as well as anchored in the company (Burby, 2013). To
accomplish this, it is recommended to analyze the corporate mission
and environmental policy.
Without appropriate action, the loss of biodiversity will keep
accelerating, with unexpected impacts on the economy and society
(David Elisha and Jebbin Felix, 2020). The following elements are
the main causes of biodiversity loss on a global scale: habitat
degradation and ecological devastation, excessive use of natural
resources (Hens and Boon, 2003; Gebretsadik, 2016; Bar et al., 2023).
3.12.1 Risks to the ﬂora
Synthetic cosmetics pose several risks to ﬂora, which refers to the
plant life within a particular ecosystem (Elisha and Terry, 2021;
Faccio, 2020). These risks primarily stem from the production, usage
(Nduka and Kelle, 2018), and disposal of synthetic cosmetics, as well
as the ingredients contained within them (Juliano and Magrini,
2017; Lafforgue and Lafforgue, 2021).
Chemical Pollution: Synthetic cosmetics often contain various
chemicals, such as parabens, phthalates, sulfates, and synthetic
fragrances (Washington State Department of Ecology (Ecology),
2023). When these products are washed off during bathing or
disposed of improperly, these chemicals can ﬁnd their way into
water bodies through sewage systems (Juliano and Magrini, 2017).
Once in the water, they can negatively impact aquatic ﬂora by
disrupting
their
growth,
reproduction,
and
overall
health
(Gonsioroski et al., 2020; Issac and Kandasubramanian, 2021).
Soil Contamination: Improper disposal of synthetic cosmetics,
such as dumping unused products or washing them off directly onto
soil, can lead to soil contamination (Bowen, 1975). Chemicals from
these cosmetics can leach into the soil, affecting the microbial
communities essential for nutrient cycling and plant growth
(Yadav,
2023).
Contaminated
soil
may
also
hinder
the
germination of seeds and the growth of plant roots (Paulsen,
2015; Yu et al., 2022).
Habitat Destruction: The production of synthetic cosmetics
often involves the extraction of natural resources, such as
minerals
and
petroleum
(Martins
and
Marto,
2023).
This
extraction process can lead to habitat destruction, particularly in
biodiverse areas rich in ﬂora. Deforestation, soil erosion, and habitat
fragmentation are some of the consequences that can directly harm
plant species and disrupt ecosystems (European Business and
Biodiversity Campaign, 2010).
Invasive
Species
Introduction:
Some
synthetic
cosmetic
ingredients,
especially
microplastics
and
non-biodegradable
substances, can inadvertently introduce invasive species into
natural habitats (Lauren, 2019; Osman et al., 2023; Ziani et al.,
2023). For example, microbeads used in exfoliating scrubs can enter
water bodies and act as vectors for the spread of invasive plant
species, disrupting native ﬂora and outcompeting indigenous plants.
Air Pollution: The production and transportation of synthetic
cosmetics contribute to air pollution through the release of
greenhouse
gases
and
other
pollutants.
Air
pollution
can
negatively impact plant health by interfering with photosynthesis,
damaging leaf surfaces, and altering soil pH levels through acid rain
deposition, ultimately affecting the composition and distribution of
ﬂora within ecosystems (Florentina and Io, 2011; Acwin Dwijendra
et al., 2023).
Different parts of the plant (Table 4) can provide ingredients for
cosmetic and personal care products (Faccio, 2020).
It has been documented that components taken from plant parts
such as bark, ﬂowers, fruit, leaves, nuts, petals, pollen, seeds, roots,
sprouts, stems, and other types of plant parts are used to create
cosmetic products (Gupta and Prakash, 2013). This may result in
plant species disappearing from the environment. As a result, plant
biodiversity declines. This contributes to additional global warming
through deforestation, which once more has a detrimental impact on
human
welfare
(Sagbo,
2021;
Nadeeshani
Dilhara
Gamage
et al., 2022).
The loss of different plant parts used as ingredients in cosmetic
formulations can have signiﬁcant ecological and physiological
consequences for the plant species involved, potentially affecting
their growth, reproduction, and survival in their natural habitats.
3.12.2 Risk on fauna
Without appropriate action, the loss of biodiversity will keep
accelerating, with unexpected impacts on the economy and society
(Spangenberg et al., 2012). The following elements are the main
causes of biodiversity loss on a global scale: habitat degradation and
ecological
devastation,
excessive
use
of
natural
resources
(Spangenberg et al., 2012; David Elisha, 2021; Hatipoglu, 2023).
Most often, factory farms serve as the primary locations where
pigs are slaughtered for their meat, and where portions of their
bodies are processed to produce the cosmetic ingredient “glycerine”
(Abattoir, 2015; National Pork Board, 2009). For instance, factory
farms seriously harm the ecology (Anomaly, 2015). Due to the high
concentration of phosphorus and nitrogen in factory-farmed pigs’
feces, when it contaminates areas outside the farm, it may cause a
great deal of harm (Chemiczne and Wody, 2012; Fiut and
Urbaniak, 2016).
Water gets excessively enriched in minerals and nutrients due to
eutrophication, which is caused by run-off pollution from waste pits
at factory farms. As a result, there is an excessive development of
algae, which frequently causes the water’s oxygen levels to drop. Fish
and other aquatic plant and animal life are subsequently killed as
a result. ‘Dead zones’ are places where this happens (Yang
et al., 2008).
In addition to being exploited and slaughtered for their meat,
skin, and milk, cattle are also used to produce tallow and other
cosmetic elements from their carcasses. Because so many cattle are
produced for these purposes and because cattle emit such large
amounts of greenhouse gases, these businesses are always bad for the
environment (Durrans, 2013).
Every year, many millions of ﬁsh are murdered for food, oils, and
substances like guanine. The effects on the ecology and, naturally,
the ﬁsh, who suffer and perish, are very harmful (Kibria, 2024).
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
18
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 19 ===
Oceans encompass 70% of the planet (Wang, 2021). The entire
ocean ecology may collapse if we do end up with ﬁshless or almost
ﬁshless oceans in the future, as is anticipated (Durrans, 2013).
Species that depend on ﬁsh for sustenance would become extinct
if humans wiped them off. Algae, kelp, plankton, krill, and worms
would all suffer greatly without the symbiosis that all these species
form in nature. The effects on the environment are mind-boggling
(Bert, 2016).
4 Challenges in managing cosmetic
ingredients
Managing cosmetic ingredients poses several challenges (Raj
and Chandrul, 2016), including:
1. Regulatory Complexity: The regulation of cosmetic ingredients
varies greatly between regions and countries, making it
challenging
for
companies
to
comply
with
different
standards and requirements (Mohd Riyaz Beg, 2016; Raj
and Chandrul, 2016; Singh et al., 2018; Ferreira et al., 2022;
Abed et al., 2024). Harmonizing regulations globally can be
difﬁcult due to differing priorities, cultural attitudes, and
scientiﬁc interpretations.
2. Ingredient Transparency: Lack of transparency regarding the
ingredients used in cosmetic products can make it difﬁcult for
consumers to make informed choices (Bibby, 2018; Standard,
2020; Santoro, 2022). Some ingredients may be listed under
generic terms or trade names, obscuring their true nature and
potential risks (Lafforgue and Lafforgue, 2021).
3. Data Gaps in Safety Information: Many cosmetic ingredients
lack comprehensive safety data, especially concerning long-
term exposure and potential interactions with other chemicals
(Amasa et al., 2012; Steiling, 2016; Panico et al., 2019; Scientiﬁc
Committee on Consumer Safety, 2021). This makes it
challenging
to
assess
their
environmental
and
health
impacts accurately.
4. Emerging
Contaminants:
New cosmetic
ingredients
are
continually being developed, and their environmental fate
and toxicity may not be fully understood (Juliano and
Magrini, 2017). These emerging contaminants can pose
challenges for monitoring and management efforts.
5. Microplastics
and
Nanoparticles:
Microplastics
and
nanoparticles are commonly used in cosmetics for various
purposes, such as exfoliation and UV protection (Leslie, 2014;
Gupta et al., 2022; Ziani et al., 2023). However, their small size
makes them difﬁcult to remove during wastewater treatment,
leading to their accumulation in the environment and potential
ecological harm.
6. Sustainable Sourcing: Many cosmetic ingredients are derived
from natural resources, such as plants and minerals (McMullen
and Dell’Acqua, 2023). Unsustainable sourcing practices can
lead
to
deforestation,
habitat
destruction,
and
loss
of
biodiversity,
posing
challenges
for
both
environmental
conservation
and
the
long-term
availability
of
these
ingredients.
7. Consumer Behavior
and Awareness:
Despite increasing
interest
in
sustainability
and
environmental
issues,
consumer
behavior
and
awareness
regarding
the
environmental impacts of cosmetics may still be limited
(Rocca et al., 2022; Martins and Marto, 2023). Educating
consumers and encouraging them to make more sustainable
choices can be challenging.
Addressing these challenges requires collaboration among
governments,
industry
stakeholders,
scientiﬁc
experts,
and
consumers to develop robust regulatory frameworks, improve
ingredient
transparency,
enhance
safety
assessment
methodologies, promote sustainable sourcing practices, and raise
awareness about the environmental impacts of cosmetics (Iswahyudi
et al., 2024).
5 Certiﬁcations
Certiﬁcation in the cosmetic industry serves several purposes,
primarily to assure consumers that products meet certain standards
of safety, quality, and environmental responsibility. However, the
necessity and effectiveness of certiﬁcation in this industry are
subjects
of
ongoing
debate,
particularly
in
light
of
the
“greenwashing” phenomenon.
Greenwashing refers to the practice of companies making
exaggerated or misleading claims about the environmental or
ethical beneﬁts of their products or practices (Aparna and
Murugan, 2024). In the cosmetics industry, this often manifests
as brands labeling their products as “natural,” “organic,” or “eco-
friendly” without sufﬁcient evidence to support these claims.
Greenwashing can mislead consumers who are seeking genuinely
sustainable or environmentally friendly options, leading them to
choose products that may not align with their values (Lopes
et al., 2023).
Several factors contribute to the prevalence of greenwashing in
the cosmetics industry:
1. Lack of Regulation: The cosmetics industry is not as heavily
regulated as other sectors, such as pharmaceuticals or food.
This
lack
of
oversight
allows
companies
to
make
unsubstantiated
claims
without
facing
signiﬁcant
consequences (Alexa, 2021).
2. Complexity of Ingredients: Consumers may have difﬁculty
understanding
ingredient
lists
and
deciphering
which
products are truly environmentally friendly or sustainable
(Komis,
2022).
This
confusion
can
make
them
more
susceptible to greenwashing tactics.
3. Market Demand: There is growing consumer demand for
natural and eco-friendly products (Baviskar et al., 2024),
leading companies to capitalize on this trend by marketing
their products as such,
even if their
claims are not
entirely accurate.
4. Competitive Pressure: Companies may feel pressured to engage
in greenwashing to remain competitive in the market,
especially if they perceive that consumers are increasingly
prioritizing sustainability (Lopes et al., 2023; Quicanga, 2023).
To combat greenwashing and provide consumers with more
reliable information, various certiﬁcation schemes have been
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
19
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 20 ===
developed in the cosmetics industry. These certiﬁcations typically
involve rigorous testing and evaluation of products to ensure they
meet speciﬁc standards for ingredients, manufacturing processes,
and environmental impact (U.S. FDA, 2021). Some of the most
widely recognized certiﬁcations include:
1. USDA Organic: This certiﬁcation veriﬁes that products meet
the United States Department of Agriculture’s standards for
organic production, including the use of organic ingredients
and environmentally friendly practices (U.S. Department of
Agriculture, 2011).
2. Ecocert: Ecocert is an independent certiﬁcation body that
veriﬁes the natural and organic content of cosmetics and
ensures
they
meet
certain
environmental
and
ethical
standards (ECOCERT Greenlife, 2022).
3. COSMOS:
COSMOS
(Cosmetic
Organic
and
Natural
Standard) is a Europe-wide standard for organic and natural
cosmetics. It sets criteria for ingredients, manufacturing
processes,
packaging,
and
labeling
to
ensure
products
are
environmentally
friendly
and
sustainable
(COSMOS, 2023).
4. Leaping Bunny: The Leaping Bunny certiﬁcation is awarded to
companies that have demonstrated their products are cruelty-
free, meaning they were not tested on animals at any stage of
development (Guide, 2020).
These
certiﬁcations
were
chosen
for
their
widespread
recognition and credibility within the cosmetics industry. While
there are other certiﬁcations available, these four are among the
most well-established and trusted by consumers seeking genuinely
sustainable and ethically produced cosmetics. However, consumers
need to remain vigilant and critically evaluate the claims made by
brands, as greenwashing tactics continue to evolve and adapt.
Additionally, efforts to improve regulation and transparency in
the industry can help reduce the prevalence of greenwashing and
ensure consumers can make informed choices about the products
they purchase.
6 Conclusion
Cosmetic items have a big impact on the environment and
human health. Because some items contain chemical substances,
there is a chance that they will cause health problems like allergies,
sensitivities, and skin irritation. Certain ingredients in cosmetics,
such as phthalates and parabens, have been connected to hormone
disruption, which may affect the development and health of the
reproductive system. Furthermore, several chemicals, including coal
tar compounds and formaldehyde, have been identiﬁed as
carcinogenic, which raises questions about potential long-term
health effects, such as an elevated risk of cancer.
Regarding
the
environment,
throughout
their
existence,
cosmetic products have contributed to several types of pollution.
The manufacturing process has the potential to emit contaminants
into the air and water during production, which could worsen the
local community’s public health issues and cause environmental
damage. In addition, the discarding of cosmetics especially those
that include microplastics may contaminate ecosystems and
waterways. Because microplastics can be consumed and cause
harm at different stages of the food chain, the buildup of tiny
particles in the environment is a concern to marine life and wildlife.
Furthermore, the production, packing, and shipping of cosmetics all
have a carbon footprint that contributes to climate change and
exacerbates
environmental
problems
worldwide.
All
things
considered, tackling the effects of cosmetics on the environment
and human health requires extensive initiatives meant to advance
safer
ingredients,
environmentally
friendly
manufacturing
processes, and conscientious consumer behavior.
Author contributions
YW:
Conceptualization,
Data
curation,
Formal
Analysis,
Investigation,
Methodology,
Software,
Supervision,
Writing–original draft, Writing–review and editing.
Funding
The author(s) declare that no ﬁnancial support was received for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Conﬂict of interest
The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and
do
not
necessarily
represent
those
of
their
afﬁliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
References
Abattoir (2015). Abattoir by-product utilization for sustainable meat industry: a
review. J. Animal Prod. Adv. 5 (6), 681. doi:10.5455/japa.20150626043918
Abed Elaziz, M. M., Khalifa, M. A., and Ghariani, R. H. (2016). Chemical and physical
investigations of Arabian Eye Kohl Brands as cosmetic in Libya. Journal of the
Turkish Chemical Society, Section A: Chemistry 4 (1), 463–463. doi:10.18596/jotcsa.
287343
Abed, M. S., Moosa, A. A., and Alzuhairi, M. A. (2024). Heavy metals in cosmetics and
tattoos: a review of historical background, health impact, and regulatory limits.
J. Hazard. Mater. Adv. 13 (December), 100390. doi:10.1016/j.hazadv.2023.100390
Acwin Dwijendra, N. K., Mohammadi, M. J., Aravindhan, S., Jalil, T. K., Taherian, M.,
Iswanto, A. H., et al. (2018). Investigating the effects of air pollution on plant species
resistance in Urban areas. Health Scope 12 (1), 1–10. doi:10.5812/jhealthscope-129786
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
20
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 21 ===
Ad, K., and Mn, A. (2019). Cosmotics and their associated adverse effects. A Rev.
(April). doi:10.31069/japsr.v2i1.1
Adegoke, E. O., Rahman, M. S., Park, Y. J., Kim, Y. J., and Pang, M. G. (2021).
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals and infectious diseases: from endocrine disruption to
immunosuppression. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 (8), 3939. doi:10.3390/ijms22083939
Ahlström, M. G., Thyssen, J. P., Wennervaldt, M., Menné, T., and Johansen, J. D.
(2019). Nickel allergy and allergic contact dermatitis: a clinical review of immunology,
epidemiology, exposure, and treatment. Contact Dermat. 81 (4), 227–241. doi:10.1111/
cod.13327
Al, R., etMei-F, Y., and Brain, S. K. (2016). Triclosan: a widespread environmental
toxicant with many biological effects. Physiology and Behav. 176 (5), 139–148. doi:10.
4049/jimmunol.1801473
Alam, M. F., Akhter, M., Mazumder, B., Ferdous, A., Hossain, M. D., Dafader, N. C.,
et al. (2019). Assessment of some heavy metals in selected cosmetics commonly used in
Bangladesh and human health risk’, Journal of Analytical Science and Technology.
J. Anal. Sci. Technol. 10 (1), 2. doi:10.1186/s40543-018-0162-0
Albugami, M. M., Buzaid, A., Shah, F., and Ahmed, A. Y. (2024). Assessment of the
color effect on cadmium and lead contents in the most popular cosmetics in the Saudi
market. Res. Square, 1–23. Available at:. doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-4119052/v1
Alexa, R. (2021). The lack of regulation in preventing greenwashing of cosmetics in
the U.S. J. legislation 47 (1), 133. Available at: https://scholarship.law.nd.edu/jleg/vol47/
iss1/5/.
Amasa, W., Santiago, D., Mekonen, S., and Ambelu, A. (2012). ‘Are cosmetics used in
developing countries safe ? Use and dermal irritation of body care products in jimma
town, southwestern Ethiopia’, J. Toxicol. 204830. doi:10.1155/2012/204830
Ananthapavan, J., et al. (2021). A cost–beneﬁt analysis framework for preventive
health interventions to aid decision-making in Australian governments’, Health
Research Policy and Systems. Biomed. Cent. 19 (1), 1–23. doi:10.1186/s12961-021-
00796-w
Anomaly, J. (2015). What’s wrong with factory farming? Public Health Ethics 8 (3),
246–254. doi:10.1093/phe/phu001
Aparna, P., and Murugan, K. S. (2024). Green washing: a deceptive marketing practice
and its implications. Atlantis Press Int. BV, 122–132. doi:10.2991/978-94-6463-374-
0_12
Arct, J., and Mieloch, M. (2020). β-carotene in skin care, Academy of Cosmetics and
Health Care, Warsaw, Poland. Pol. J. Cosmetol 2016 19 (3), 206–213. (20 December).
Arshad, H., Mehmood, M. Z., Shah, M. H., and Abbasi, A. M. (2020). Evaluation of
heavy metals in cosmetic products and their health risk assessment. Saudi Pharm. J. 28
(7), 779–790. doi:10.1016/j.jsps.2020.05.006
Asfaw, T. S., Botes, V., and Mengesha, L. G. (2017). The role of NGOs in corporate
environmental responsibility practice: evidence from Ethiopia. Int. J. Corp. Soc.
Responsib. 2 (1), 2–9. doi:10.1186/s40991-017-0013-0
Ashdaq, M., Alam, S., Aris, V., and Mandasari, N. F. (2023). The impact of marketing
through social media on brand attitudes: a study of cosmetics products in female
generation Z. J. Econ. Finance Manag. Stud. 06 (08), 3702–3709. doi:10.47191/jefms/v6-
i8-19
Attard, T. A., and Abstract, E. (2022) ‘Heavy metals in cosmetics. In Intech, 13. doi:10.
5772/intechopen.102406
Bar, S., Dhara, S., Madhu, N. R., Mandal, B., Sarkar, B., and Ghorai, S. K. (2023). Root
causes of biodiversity loss with special reference to India. A Basic Overv. Environ.
Sustain. Dev., 1–34. [Volume: 2]. doi:10.52756/boesd.2023.e02.001
Barabasz, W., Pikulicka, A., Wzorek, Z., and Nowak, A. K. (2019). Ecotoxicological
aspects of the use of parabens in the production of cosmetics. Czas. Tech. (12), 99–124.
doi:10.4467/2353737xct.19.126.11451
Barthe, M., Bavoux, C., Finot, F., Mouche, I., Cuceu-Petrenci, C., Forreryd, A., et al.
(2021). Safety testing of cosmetic products: overview of established methods and new
approach methodologies (nams). Cosmetics 8 (2), 50–18. doi:10.3390/cosmetics8020050
Baviskar, D., Chattaraj, A., and Patil, A. (2024). Consumer behaviour and sustainable
product choices: insights from visual trends. E3S Web Conf. 472, 02002–02014. doi:10.
1051/e3sconf/202447202002
Bergman, J., and Kandel, H. (2017). Safﬂower production. Gaborone, Botswana: The
Botswana University of Agriculture and Natural Resources, NDSU Extension Service.
Bert, D. G. (2016). Determining the spatial scale of species ’ determining the spatial
scale of species. Response Habitat’ 3568 (August). doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2004)054
Bibby, J. (2018). Transitioning to transparency. The Aldrich Press: England.
Bilal, A. I., Tilahun, Z., Osman, E. D., Mulugeta, A., Shekabdulahi, M., and Berhe, D.
F. (2017). Cosmetics use-related adverse events and determinants among jigjiga town
residents, eastern Ethiopia’, Dermatology and therapy. Springer Healthc. 7 (1), 143–153.
doi:10.1007/s13555-016-0157-y
Biskanaki, F., Kaloﬁri, P., Tertipi, N., Sfyri, E., Andreou, E., Kefala, V., et al. (2023).
Carotenoids and dermoaesthetic beneﬁts: public health implications. Cosmetics 10 (5),
120. doi:10.3390/cosmetics10050120
Borowska, S., and Brzóska, M. M. (2015). Metals in cosmetics: implications for human
health. J. Appl. Toxicol. 35 (January), 551–572. doi:10.1002/jat.3129
Bouyssi-Kobar, M., et al. (2019). Personal care product use as a predictor of urinary
concentrations of certain phthalates, parabens, and phenols in the HERMOSA study.
J. Pediatr. 29 (1), 13–22. doi:10.1038/s41370-017-0003-z.Personal
Bowen, H. J. M. (1975). Soil pollution. Educ. Chem. doi:10.5124/jkma.1998.41.10.1032
Boyer, I. J., Bergfeld, W. F., Heldreth, B., Fiume, M. M., and Gill, L. J. (2017). The
cosmetic ingredient review program - expert safety assessments of cosmetic ingredients
in
an
open
forum.
Int.
J.
Toxicol.
36
(5_Suppl.
2),
5S–13S.
doi:10.1177/
1091581817717646
Brausch, J. M., and Rand, G. M. (2011). A review of personal care products in the
aquatic environment: environmental concentrations and toxicity. Chemosphere 82 (11),
1518–1532. doi:10.1016/j.chemosphere.2010.11.018
Burby, R. (2013). Environmental management and governance. Environ. Manag. Gov.
doi:10.4324/9780203439876
Canada, H. (2007). Concentrations and exposure risks of some metals in facial
cosmetics in Nigeria. Toxicol. Rep. 3, 464–472. Elsevier Ireland Ltd,. doi:10.1016/j.
toxrep.2016.04.004
Canavez, A. D. P. M., de Oliveira Prado Corrêa, G., Isaac, V. L. B., Schuck, D. C., and
Lorencini, M. (2021). Integrated approaches to testing and assessment as a tool for the
hazard assessment and risk characterization of cosmetic preservatives. J. Appl. Toxicol.
41 (10), 1687–1699. doi:10.1002/jat.4156
CBD (2002). CBD (convention on biological diversity). UNEP/CBD/COP/6/
20 Page 249’. Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity: Montreal,
Canada, 249–261.
Cerulli, A., glabra, G., uralensis, G., inﬂata, G., et al. (2022). Licorice (Glycyrrhiza
glabra, G. Uralensis, and G. Inﬂata) and their constituents as active cosmeceutical
ingredients. Cosmetics 9 (1), 7. doi:10.3390/cosmetics9010007
Chamer, A. M., Medan, D., Mantese, A., and Bartoloni, N. (2015). Impact of
pollination on sunﬂower yield: is pollen amount or pollen quality what matters?
Field Crops Res. 176, 61–70. doi:10.1016/j.fcr.2015.02.001
Chandellier, J., and Malacain, M. (2021). ‘Biodiversity and Re/insurance: an
ecosystem at risk biodiversity and re/insurance: technical report’, (April).
Charkiewicz, A. E., Omeljaniuk, W. J., Nowak, K., Garley, M., and Nikliński, J. (2023).
Cadmium toxicity and health effects—a brief summary. Molecules 28 (18), 6620–6716.
doi:10.3390/molecules28186620
Chedik, L., Baybekov, S., Cosnier, F., Marcou, G., Varnek, A., and Champmartin, C.
(2024). An update of skin permeability data based on a systematic review of recent
research. Sci. Data 11 (1), 224–314. doi:10.1038/s41597-024-03026-4
Chemiczne, Z., and Wody, G. I. (2012). ‘Chemical polluting of soil and water on pig
-breading farm’, Ecol. Chem. Eng. A. 19 (1-2), 25–33. doi:10.2428/ecea.2012.19(01)002
Cherraﬁ, A., Chiarini, A., Belhadi, A., El Baz, J., and Chaouni Benabdellah, A. (2022).
Digital technologies and circular economy practices: vital enablers to support
sustainable and resilient supply chain management in the post-COVID-19 era.
TQM J. 34 (7), 179–202. doi:10.1108/TQM-12-2021-0374
Chouhan, N., and Himanshu Vig, R. D. (2021). Cosmetics market by category (skin
and sun care products, hair care products, deodorants & fragrances, and makeup &
color cosmetics), gender (men, women, and unisex), and distribution channel
hypermarkets/supermarkets, specialty stores, pharmacies, onli’, Allied Mark. Res.
Available at: https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/cosmetics-market.
Cooney, R. (2004). “Precaution and invasive alien species: challenges at the interface
of the trade and environment regimes,” in Biodiversity loss and species extinctions:
managing risk in a changing world. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/237626762.
COSMOS (2023). COSMOS STANDARD criteria. Brussels, Belgium: COSMOS
Standard AISBL, 0–52. Available at: https://www.cosmos-standard.orgww.
David, E., and Niculescu, V. C. (2021). Volatile organic compounds (Vocs) as
environmental pollutants: occurrence and mitigation using nanomaterials. Int.
J. Environ. Res. Public Health 18 (24), 13147. doi:10.3390/ijerph182413147
David Elisha, O., and Jebbin Felix, M. (2020). The loss of biodiversity and ecosystems:
a threat to the functioning of our planet, economy and human society. Int. J. Econ.
Environ. Dev. Soc. 1 (1), 30–44. Available at: www.ijeeds.com.
David Elisha, O. (2021). Destruction of costal ecosystems and the vicious cycle odf
poverty in Niger delta region. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
353741948.
Durrans, B. (2013). The future of the other: changing cultures on display in
ethnographic museums. Mus. Time-Machine, 144–169. doi:10.4324/9780203358825_
chapter_7
Department of Health and Human Services (2016). Report on carcinogens.
Fourteenth Edition. Available at: https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/index-1.html’
ECOCERT Greenlife (2022). ECOCERT standard natural detergents and natural
detergents made with organic. Available at: www.ecocert.
Ejeromedoghene, O., Nwosisi, M., Tesi, G., Noragbon, E., and Akinyeye, R. (2021).
Impact of pharmaceutical waste generation and handling on environmental health in
developing countries: COVID – 19 pandemic in perspective. J. Appl. Sci. Environ.
Manag. 25 (3), 385–396. doi:10.4314/jasem.v25i3.12
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
21
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 22 ===
Elisha, O. D., and Terry, D. (2021). Destruction of costal ecosystems and the vicious
cycle odf poverty in Niger delta region. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/353741948.
Environmental, N. (2019). ‘Reproductive and developmental hazards: a guide for
occupational’, (April).
EPA (2001). Integrated risk information system (IRIS) chemical assessment
summary: methylmercury (MeHg). CASRN 22967-92-6’, 1–43.
Esposito, T., Sansone, F., Franceschelli, S., Del Gaudio, P., Picerno, P., Aquino, R.,
et al. (2017). Hazelnut (Corylus avellana l.) shells extract: phenolic composition,
antioxidant effect and cytotoxic activity on human cancer cell lines. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
18 (2), 392. doi:10.3390/ijms18020392
Eticha, T., et al. (2018a). Levels and exposure risks of metals in lipsticks in mekelle,
Ethiopia. Int. J. Reserach Pharm. Chem. 8 (1), 1–5.
Eticha, T., Getachew, H., Kahsay, G., and Gebretsadik, H. (2018b). Metals
contamination in face powders and their associated health risks to the users in
mekelle, Ethiopia. J. Environ. & Anal. Toxicol. 08 (01). doi:10.4172/2161-0525.1000547
European Business and Biodiversity Campaign (EBBC) (2010). Fact sheet:
biodiversity in the cosmetics sector. Available at: https://www.business-biodiversity.
eu/en/knowledge-pool/wild-harvesting.
European Parliament (2018). Testing cosmetics on animals: MEPs call for worldwide ban |
News | European Parliament. Available at: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-
room/20180426IPR02613/testing-cosmetics-on-animals-meps-call-for-worldwide-ban.
European Union, E. (2009). Regulation no 1223/2009 on cosmetic products. Nouv.
Dermatol. 29 (5 PART 1).
Faccio, G. (2020). Plant complexity and cosmetic innovation. iScience 23 (8), 101358.
doi:10.1016/j.isci.2020.101358
FDA (2022). FDA regulation of cosmetics and personal care products. Available at:
https://crsreports.congress.gov.
Ferreira, M., Matos, A., Couras, A., Marto, J., and Ribeiro, H. (2022). Overview of
cosmetic regulatory frameworks around the world. Cosmetics 9 (4), 72–15. doi:10.3390/
cosmetics9040072
Final Countdown (2018). Now or never to reform the palm oil industry Greenpeace.
Available at: https://www.greenpeace.org/international/publication/18455/the-ﬁnal-
countdown-forests-indonesia-palm-oil/.196
Fiut, I. S., and Urbaniak, M. (2016). Factory farming versus environment and society.
The analysis of selected problems przemysłowa hodowla zwierząt a środowisko i
społeczeństwo. Analiza wybranych problemów. Probl. Ekorozwoju 12 (1), 143–156.
Available at: www.nonhumanrightsproject.org/.
Florentina, I., and Io, B. (2011). The Effects of Air Pollutants on Vegetation and the
Role of Vegetation in Reducing Atmospheric Pollution, in The Impact of Air Pollution
on Health, Economy, Environment and Agricultural Sources. doi:10.5772/17660
Francisco, M., Peinado, L. M. I.-D., and Olga Ocón-Hernández, N. O. (2012).
Endocrine disrupting chemicals in cosmetics and personal care products and risk of
endometriosis. Intech, 13. Available at: doi:10.1039/C7RA00172J%0A
Gad, H. A., Roberts, A., Hamzi, S. H., Touiss, I., Altyar, A. E., et al. (2021). Jojoba oil:
an updated comprehensive review on chemistry, pharmaceutical uses, and toxicity.
Polymers 13 (11), 1711–1722. doi:10.3390/polym13111711
Gago, J., Carretero, O., Filgueiras, A., and Viñas, L. (2018). Synthetic microﬁbers in
the marine environment: a review on their occurrence in seawater and sediments. Mar.
Pollut. Bull. 127 (July 2017), 365–376. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.11.070
Gao, U. S. G. A. O. (2009). Options for enhancing the effectiveness of the toxic substances
control act Highlights. GAO-09-428T Toxic Substances Control Reforms’, in Control.
Gautam, P., Ganghas, D., Mittal, P., Gupta, V., and Dhiman, K. (2022). Regulatory
framework of cosmetic in the European Union. Toxicol. Commun. 4 (3), 13. doi:10.
53388/20220202013
Gebretsadik, T. (2016). Causes for biodiversity loss in Ethiopia: a review from
conservation perspective. J. Nat. Sci. Res. 6 (11), 32–40. doi:10.4172/2376-0354.1000171
Genchi, G., Sinicropi, M. S., Lauria, G., Carocci, A., and Catalano, A. (2020). The
effects of cadmium toxicity. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17 (11), 3782–3824.
doi:10.3390/ijerph17113782
Ghosh, S., Sinha, J. K., Vashisth, K., Han, S., and Bhaskar, R. (2023). Microplastics as
an emerging threat to the global environment and human health. Sustain. Switz. 15 (14),
10821. doi:10.3390/su151410821
Gisp, N., and Jackson, D. L. (2007). The global invasive species Programme.
Gnonsoro, U. P., Ake Assi, Y. E. D., Sangare, N. S., Kouakou, Y. U., and Trokourey, A.
(2022). Health risk assessment of heavy metals (Pb, Cd, Hg) in hydroalcoholic gels of
abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire’, biological trace element research. Springer U. S. 200 (5),
2510–2518. doi:10.1007/s12011-021-02822-y
Gonsioroski, A., Mourikes, V. E., and Flaws, J. A. (2020). Endocrine disruptors in
water and their effects on the reproductive system. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (6). doi:10.3390/
ijms21061929
Group, E. W. (2007). 1,4-dioxane. Available at: http://www.ainfo.inia.uy/digital/
bitstream/item/7130/1/LUZARDO-BUIATRIA-2017.pdf.
Guerranti, C., Andreuccetti, C., Cenni, I., Santini, S., Martellini, T., Cincinelli, A., et al.
(2022). Cosmetics trace elemental content: analytical methodology and toxicity
evaluation of products in the Italian market. Anal. Lett. 56 (7), 1115–1127. doi:10.
1080/00032719.2022.2121405
Guide, C. M. R. U. (2020). User guide user guide. Computer, 169–232. doi:10.21945/
IVM-476
Gupta, C., and Prakash, D. (2013). Herbal plants used in cosmetics and
cosmeceuticals and their advantages over the synthetic counterparts. Med. Aromatic
Plants World. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.020
Gupta, V., et al. (2022). Nanotechnology in cosmetics and cosmeceuticals — a review.
Gels 2022, 1–31. doi:10.3390/gels8030173
Gutierrez, L. (2023). Beauty at what cost ? The environmental impact of cosmetic
ingredients and Materials;Sustainable LivingSustainable manufacturing. Available at:
https://sustainable-earth.org/cosmeticingredients/#:~:text=Some%20common%
20makeup%20ingredients%2C%20such,and%20pollution%20.
Haji, A. S., Maurya, S. R., and Shah, N. (2023). Azadirachta indica A. Juss.:
ethnobotanical knowledge, phytochemical studies, pharmacological aspects future
prospects. Plant Environ. 5 (1), 1–15. doi:10.22271/2582-3744.2023.mar.1
Hatipoglu, İ. H. (2023). The importance of rose and rosehip species in past, present,
and tomorrow. Int. Conf. Appl. Eng. Nat. Sci. 1 (1), 268–273. doi:10.59287/icaens.1004
He, K., Hain, E., Timm, A., and Blaney, L. (2021). Bioaccumulation of estrogenic
hormones and UV-ﬁlters in red swamp crayﬁsh (Procambarus clarkii). Sci. Total
Environ. 764, 142871. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142871
Health Canada (2007). Evidence for quality of ﬁnished natural health products.
Health Canada (2016). Guidelines for Canadian drinking water quality - chromium.
Available at: www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-workplace-
health/reports-publications/water-quality.html.
Helmstetter, A. J., Oztolan-Erol, N., Lucas, S. J., and Buggs, R. J. A. (2020). Genetic
diversity and domestication of hazelnut (Corylus avellana L.) in Turkey. Plants People
Planet 2 (4), 326–339. doi:10.1002/ppp3.10078
Hens, L., and Boon, E. K. (2003). Causes of biodiversity loss: a human ecological
analysis. MultiCiencia (August), 1–29. doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2003.10.003
Hwang, D., Kim, H., Shin, H., Jeong, H., Kim, J., and Kim, D. (2014). Cosmetic effects
of Prunus padus bark extract. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 31 (12), 2280–2285. doi:10.1007/
s11814-014-0146-8
IARC (1987). International Agency for Research on Cancer. Overall evaluations of
carcinogenicity: an updating of IARC monographs volumes 1–42. IARC Monogr. Eval.
Carcinog. Risks Humans 1987, 230–232. doi:10.1016/0300-483X(87)90138-0
Ibrahim, U., Yusuf, S. D., and Ubana, M. A. (2019). Health risk assessment of some
cosmetic products sold in Kefﬁmarkets. Nasarawa State Nigeria’ 5 (2), 82–90. doi:10.
1186/s12881-019-0803-3
Inoti, S. K. (2017). ‘Genetic diversity in jojoba (simmondsia chinensis L.) using simple
sequence repeats in semi-arid areas of Kenya’, 3(4).
Issac, M. N., and Kandasubramanian, B. (2021). Effect of microplastics in water and
aquatic systems’, Environmental Science and Pollution Research. Environ. Sci. Pollut.
Res. 28 (16), 19544–19562. doi:10.1007/s11356-021-13184-2
Iswahyudi, I., Sutanto, A., Widodo, W., Warkoyo, W., Garfansa, W. P., and Ariﬁn, S.
(2024). The effect of microplastic contaminated compost on the growth of rice
seedlings. J. Saudi Soc. Agri. Sci. King Saud University & Saudi Society of
Agricultural Sciences, 1–8. doi:10.1016/j.jssas.2024.07.001
Iwegbue, C. M. A., Bassey, F. I., Obi, G., Tesi, G. O., and Martincigh, B. S. (2016).
Concentrations and exposure risks of some metals in facial cosmetics in Nigeria.
Toxicol. Rep. 3, 464–472. doi:10.1016/j.toxrep.2016.04.004
Jarošová, M., and Pajdlhauser, M. (2022). Aviation and climate change. Transp. Res.
Procedia 65 (C), 216–221. doi:10.1016/j.trpro.2022.11.025
John Kanayochukwu Nduka, H. I. K. (2019) ‘Review of Health hazards and
toxicological effects of constituents of cosmetics doi:10.5772/intechopen.845901–18.
Juliano, C., and Magrini, G. A. (2017). Cosmetic ingredients as emerging pollutants of
environmental and health concern. A mini-review. A Mini-Review 4, 11. doi:10.3390/
cosmetics4020011
Kader Mohiuddin, A. (2019). Heavy metals in cosmetics: the notorious daredevils and
burning health issues. Am. J. Biomed. Sci. & Res. 4 (5), 332–337. doi:10.34297/ajbsr.
2019.04.000829
Kaličanin, B., and Velimirović, D. (2016). A study of the possible harmful effects of
cosmetic beauty products on human health. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 170 (2), 476–484.
doi:10.1007/s12011-015-0477-2
Khalid, M., and Abdollahi, M. (2021). Environmental distribution of personal care
products and their effects on human health. Iran. J. Pharm. Res. 20 (1), 216–253. doi:10.
22037/ijpr.2021.114891.15088
Kibria, G. (2024). ‘Global ﬁsh kills: causes and consequences global ﬁsh kill: causes and
consequences causes of ﬁsh kills’, (April 2014).
Komis,
A.
I.
(2022).
Consumer’s
ethical
perception
on
greenwashing
acknowledgements.
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
22
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 23 ===
Kowalczyk, S., Grymel, M., Bilik, J., Kula, W., Wawoczny, A., Grymel, P., et al. (2024).
Selected plants as sources of natural and active ingredients for cosmetics of the future.
Appl. Sci. 14, 3487. doi:10.3390/app14083487
Lafforgue, A. B. C., and Lafforgue, C. (2021). ‘Risks associated with cosmetic
ingredients’, 148, 77, 93. doi:10.1016/j.annder.2020.04.027
Lauren, Z. (2019). Pretty hurts: are chemicals in beauty products making us ill?
Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2019/may/23/are-chemicals-in-
beauty-products-making-us-ill.
Leaman, D. J. (2008). ‘The international standard for sustainable wild collection of
medicinal and aromatic plants (issc-map) elements of the standard relevant to cites
(ISSC-MAP) Elements of the Standard Relevant to CITES NDF, Cancun, Mexico,
November 2008’.
Leslie, H. A. (2014). Review of microplastics in cosmetics. IVM Inst. Environ. Stud.
476 (July), 33.
Li, B., Wang, J., Hu, G., Liu, X., Yu, Y., Cai, D., et al. (2023). Bioaccumulation behavior
and human health risk of polybrominated diphenyl ethers in a freshwater food web of
typical shallow lake, yangtze river delta. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 20 (3),
2671–2716. doi:10.3390/ijerph20032671
Li, X., Gao, Y., Wang, J., Ji, G., Lu, Y., Yang, D., et al. (2017). Exposure to
environmental endocrine disruptors and human health. J. Public Health Emerg. 1, 8.
doi:10.21037/jphe.2016.12.09
Li, Y., Fang, Y., Liu, Z., Zhang, Y., Liu, K., Jiang, L., et al. (2021). Trace metal lead
exposure in typical lip cosmetics from electronic commercial platform: investigation,
health risk assessment and blood lead level analysis. Front. Public Health 9 (November),
1–13. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2021.766984
Limonta, G., Mancia, A., Benkhalqui, A., Bertolucci, C., Abelli, L., Fossi, M. C., et al.
(2019). Microplastics induce transcriptional changes, immune response and behavioral
alterations in adult zebraﬁsh. Sci. Rep. Springer U. S. 9 (1), 15775–15811. doi:10.1038/
s41598-019-52292-5
Lisa, M., and Benson, K. R. (2017). Guide to United States cosmetic products
compliance requirements, National Institute of Standards and Technology. doi:10.
6028/NIST.IR.8178
Liu, G., Cai, W., Liu, H., Jiang, H., Bi, Y., and Wang, H. (2021). The association of
bisphenol a and phthalates with risk of breast cancer: a meta-analysis. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health 18 (5), 2375–2415. doi:10.3390/ijerph18052375
Liu, J. L., and Wong, M. H. (2013). Pharmaceuticals and personal care products
(PPCPs): a review on environmental contamination in China. Environ. Int. 59, 208–224.
doi:10.1016/j.envint.2013.06.012
Łodyga-Chruścińska, E., Sykuła, A., and Wie¸dłocha, M. (2018). Hidden metals in
several brands of lipstick and face powder present on Polish market. Cosmetics 5 (4),
57–59. doi:10.3390/cosmetics5040057
Lojeng, R. K. (2022). ‘Biodiversity in the cosmetic industry’.
Lopes, J. M., Gomes, S., and Trancoso, T. (2023). The dark side of green marketing:
how greenwashing affects circular consumption? Sustain. Switz. 15 (15), 11649–11717.
doi:10.3390/su151511649
Made Safe (2022). ChemicalCallout: BHT and BHA. Available at: https://www.
madesafe.org/chemical-proﬁles/bht-and-bha/’
Martins, A. M., and Marto, J. M. (2023). A sustainable life cycle for cosmetics: from
design and development to post-use phase. Sustain. Chem. Pharm. 35, 101178. doi:10.
1016/j.scp.2023.101178
McDonald, B. C., de Gouw, J. A., Gilman, J. B., Jathar, S. H., Akherati, A., Cappa, C.
D., et al. (2018). Volatile chemical products emerging as largest petrochemical source of
urban organic emissions. Science 359 (6377), 760–764. doi:10.1126/science.aaq0524
McMullen, R. L., and Dell’Acqua, G. (2023). History of natural ingredients in
cosmetics. Cosmetics 10 (3), 71. doi:10.3390/cosmetics10030071
Mesquita, I., Lorigo, M., and Cairrao, E. (2021). Update about the disrupting-effects of
phthalates on the human reproductive system. Mol. Reproduction Dev. 88 (10),
650–672. doi:10.1002/mrd.23541
Mestawet, G., Getachew, M., and Tewelde, T. (2018). Cosmetic use and its adverse
events among female. Employees Jimma Univ., Southwest Ethiop. 28 (6), 717. doi:10.
4314/ejhs.v28i6.6’
Miller, I. B., Pawlowski, S., Kellermann, M. Y., Petersen-Thiery, M., Moeller, M.,
Nietzer, S., et al. (2021). Toxic effects of UV ﬁlters from sunscreens on coral reefs
revisited: regulatory aspects for “reef safe” products. Environ. Sci. Eur. 33 (1), 74. doi:10.
1186/s12302-021-00515-w
Milman, O. (2019). US cosmetics are full of chemicals banned by Europe – why? The
Guardian. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2019/may/22/
c h e m i c a l s - i n - c o s m e t i c s - u s - r e s t r i c t e d - e u , P a p e r K n o w l e d g e .
TowardaMediaHistoryofDocuments.
Mohd Riyaz Beg, M. (2016). Cosmetic-Regulations, Research & Marketing challenges
and global compliance: an overview. Inst. Chem. Technol. Mumbai Cosmetic-
Regulations. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.10.045
Mozas-Blanco, S., Rodríguez-Gil, J. L., Kalman, J., Quintana, G., Díaz-Cruz, M. S.,
Rico, A., et al. (2023). Occurrence and ecological risk assessment of organic UV ﬁlters in
coastal waters of the Iberian Peninsula. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 196 (November), 115644.
doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2023.115644
Murphy, D. J., Goggin, K., and Paterson, R. R. M. (2021). Oil palm in the 2020s and
beyond: challenges and solutions’, CABI Agriculture and Bioscience. Biomed. Cent. 2 (1),
1–22. doi:10.1186/s43170-021-00058-3
Nadeeshani Dilhara Gamage, D. G., Dharmadasa, R. M., Chandana Abeysinghe, D.,
Saman Wijesekara, R. G., Prathapasinghe, G. A., and Someya, T. (2022). Global
perspective of plant-based cosmetic industry and possible contribution of Sri Lanka
to the development of herbal cosmetics. Evidence-based Complementary Altern. Med.
2022, 1–26. doi:10.1155/2022/9940548
Nassan, F. L., Coull, B. A., Gaskins, A. J., Williams, M. A., Skakkebaek, N. E., Ford,
J. B., et al. (2017). Personal care product use in men and urinary concentrations of select
phthalate metabolites and parabens: results from the environment and reproductive
health (earth) study. Environ. Health Perspect. 125 (8), 1–10. doi:10.1289/EHP1374
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (2007). Cosmetics and your
health. USA: US Department of Health and Human Services. Available at: http://
s c h o l a r . g o o g l e . c o m / s c h o l a r ? h l = e n & b t n G = S e a r c h & q = i n t i t l e :
Cosmetics+and+Your+Health#0.
National Pork Board (2009). The pork industry at a glance, Pork Checkoff. Available
at: https://www.pork.org/publications/2009-annual-report/.
Naveed, N. (2014). The perils of cosmetics. Pharm. Sci. Res. doi:10.13040/IJPSR.0975-
8232.6(10).338-41
Nduka, J. K., and Kelle, H. I. (2018). Review of health hazards and toxicological effects
of constituents of cosmetics, 1–18.
Nduka, J. K., Odiba, I. O., Aghoghome, E. I., Umedum, N. L., and Nwosu, M. J. (2016).
Evaluation of harmful substances and health risk assessment of mercury and arsenic in
cosmetic brands in Nigeria. Int. J. Chem. 8 (1), 178. doi:10.5539/ijc.v8n1p178
Nestby, R. D. J. (2020). The status of prunus padus L. (Bird cherry) in forest
communities throughout Europe and Asia. Forests 11 (5), 497–518. doi:10.3390/
F11050497
Nikolovska, V. (2016). Invasive species: a look at their disastrous effects on
ecosystems, health, and stability of native species. Rev. A J. Undergrad. Student Res.
17. doi:10.3390/su8121512
NYS Health Foundation (2013). Fact sheet: potentially toxic chemicals in personal
care products. Available at: https://www.healthline.com/health/beauty-skin-care/what-
is-sodium-lauryl-sulfate.
Oh, H. J., and Kim, J. (2020). Characterization of inhalable aerosols from cosmetic
powders and sustainability in cosmetic products. Sustain. Switz. 12 (19), 8187. doi:10.
3390/su12198187
Okereke, J. N., et al. (2015). Possible health implications associated with cosmetics. A
Rev. 3, 58–63. doi:10.11648/j.sjph.s.2015030501.21
Oluwole, A. O., Omotola, E. O., and Olatunji, O. S. (2020). Pharmaceuticals and
personal care products in water and wastewater: a review of treatment processes and use
of photocatalyst immobilized on functionalized carbon in AOP degradation. BMC
Chem. 14 (1), 62–29. doi:10.1186/s13065-020-00714-1
Onel, S., Davidson, J. A., Dwyer, D., Ehrlich, S., Meyer, C. L., Reagan, K. S., et al.
(2019). U.S. Food and drug administration (FDA) and the products it regulates. Kirk-
Othmer Encycl. Chem. Technol., 1–27. doi:10.1002/0471238961.1608011825091407.a01.
pub3
Orangutan
Foundation
International
(2015).
Whats-Wrong-with-Palm-Oil?
Available at: https://orangutan.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Whats-Wrong-with-
Palm-Oil-FLYER.pdf’
Osman, A. I., Hosny, M., Eltaweil, A. S., Omar, S., Elgarahy, A. M., Farghali, M., et al.
(2023). Microplastic sources, formation, toxicity and remediation: a review. Environ.
Chem. Lett. 21, 2129–2169. Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/s10311-023-
01593-3
Palma-Lara, I., Martínez-Castillo, M., Quintana-Pérez, J., Arellano-Mendoza, M.,
Tamay-Cach, F., Valenzuela-Limón, O., et al. (2020). Arsenic exposure: a public health
problem leading to several cancers. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 110, 104539. doi:10.1016/
j.yrtph.2019.104539
Panico, A., Serio, F., Bagordo, F., Grassi, T., Idolo, A., De Giorgi, M., et al. (2019). Skin
safety and health prevention: an overview of chemicals in cosmetic products. J. Prev.
Med. Hyg. 60 (1), E50-E57–E57. doi:10.15167/2421-4248/jpmh2019.60.1.1080
Park, J. w. Y. J. K. J. C. H. K. J. N. A. Ö. S. W.-S. (2023). Advances inthe development
of ingridents with both high performance and sustainablity for clean beuty cosmetics.
Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 45, 1–61. doi:10.1111/ics.12921
Paulsen, L. (2015). The health risks of chemicals in personal care products and their
fate in the environment. Chem. Honors Pap. 15. Available at: https://digitalcommons.
conncoll.edu/chemhp/15.
Peng, X., Fan, Y., Jin, J., Xiong, S., Liu, J., and Tang, C. (2017). Bioaccumulation and
biomagniﬁcation of ultraviolet absorbents in marine wildlife of the pearl river estuarine,
south China sea. Environ. Pollut. 225, 55–65. Elsevier Ltd,. doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2017.
03.035
Pereira, J. X., and Pereira, T. C. (2018). Cosmetics and its health risks. Glob. J. Med.
Res. 18 (2), 63–70. doi:10.34257/gjmrbvol18is2pg63
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
23
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 24 ===
Pinto, D., Braga, N., Rodrigues, F., and Oliveira, M. (2017). Castanea sativa Bur: an
undervalued by-product but a promising cosmetic ingredient. Cosmetics 4 (4), 50–59.
doi:10.3390/cosmetics4040050
Pinto, D., Cádiz-Gurrea, M. d. l. L., Garcia, J., Saavedra, M. J., Freitas, V., Costa, P.,
et al. (2021). From soil to cosmetic industry: validation of a new cosmetic ingredient
extracted from chestnut shells. Sustain. Mater. Technol. 29 (June), e00309. doi:10.1016/j.
susmat.2021.e00309
Practices, B., et al. (2021). ‘Regulating risk from toxic substances’, (July).
Prusakiewicz, J. J., Harville, H. M., Zhang, Y., Ackermann, C., and Voorman, R. L.
(2007). Parabens inhibit human skin estrogen sulfotransferase activity: possible link to
paraben estrogenic effects. Toxicology 232 (3), 248–256. doi:10.1016/j.tox.2007.01.010
Queiroz, A., and Cajaiba, J. (2016). A sustainable process for (-)-α-bisabolol
extraction from Eremanthus erythropappus using supercritical CO2 and ethanol as
co-solvent. J. Supercrit. Fluids 110, 39–46. doi:10.1016/j.supﬂu.2015.12.011
Quicanga, A. (2023). Perceptions of greenwashing’S impact on green concern and green
purchase intentions. Umeå University: Umeå, Sweden, 1–82.
Raj, R. K., and Chandrul, K. K. (2016). Regulatory requirements for cosmetics in relation
with regulatory authorities in India against US, Europe, Australia and asean countries. Int.
J. Pharma Res. Health Sci. 4 (5), 1332–1341. doi:10.21276/ijprhs.2016.05.01
Ramelli, G. P., Taddeo, I., Herrmann, U., and Weber, P. (2012). V13 Poster location
013 Paroxysmal tonic upgaze of infancy: 5 additional cases. Eur. J. Paediatr. Neurology
13 (September), S10. doi:10.1016/s1090-3798(09)70033-9
Rastogi, S. C., Schouten, A., de Kruijf, N., and Weijland, J. W. (1995). Contents of
methyl-, ethyl-, propyl-, butyl- and benzylparaben in cosmetic products. Contact
Dermat. 32, 28–30. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0536.1995.tb00836.x
Ravindra, H., Arya, P., and Haq, S. A. (2019). Effects of xenobiotics and their
biodegradation in marine life. Smart Bioremediation Technol. Microb. Enzym., 63–81.
Elsevier Inc. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-818307-6.00004-4
Ray, S. S., Gusain, R., and Kumar, N. (2020). Classiﬁcation of water contaminants.
Carbon Nanomaterial-Based Adsorbents Water Purif., 11–36. doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-
821959-1.00002-7
Raymond, K., and Krupnick, A. (2016). Cost-beneﬁt analysis and regulatory
reformResources for the Future: Washington, D.C., United States, 1–23.
Ricardo (2021). Economic analysis of the impacts of the chemicals strategy for
sustainability. Available at: https://ceﬁc.org/app/uploads/2021/12/Economic-Analysis-
of-the-Impacts-of-the-Chemicals-Strategy-for-Sustainability-Phase-1.pdf.
Rocca, R., Acerbi, F., Fumagalli, L., and Taisch, M. (2022). Sustainability paradigm in
the cosmetics industry: State of the art. Clean. Waste Syst. 3 (May), 100057. doi:10.1016/
j.clwas.2022.100057
Rodrigues, R., Oliveira, M. B. P. P., and Alves, R. C. (2023). Chlorogenic acids and
caffeine from coffee by-products: a review on skincare applications. Cosmetics 10 (1), 12.
doi:10.3390/cosmetics10010012
Rootid (2022). Campaign for safe cosmetics, a project of breast cancer prevention
partners. Available at: https://www.safecosmetics.org/get-thefacts/regulations/
international-laws/.doi:10.1017/S1816383120000144
Sadie (2020). How the beauty industry is harming our seas and oceans. Available at:
https://www.green-sail.com/blog/how-the-beauty-industry-is-harming-our-seas-and-
oceans’
Sagbo, J. (2021). ‘Indigenous cosmetics plants in the eastern cape province of South
Africa: a case of skin care’.
Salles, F. J., Paniz, F. P., Batista, B. L., Nardocci, A. C., and Olympio, K. P. K. (2023).
Potentially toxic elements in costume cosmetics used by children and adults are
associated with cancer risk. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 20 (1), 531. doi:10.
3390/ijerph20010531
Sandha, G. K., and Swami, V. K. (2009). Jojoba oil as an organic, shelf stable standard
oil-phase base for cosmetic industry. Rasayan J. Chem. 2 (2), 300–306.
Santoro, C. (2022). Sustainability and transparency in the cosmetic industry: the clean
beauty
movement
and
consumers’
consciousness.
Palgrave
Macmillan:
Cham,
Switzerland.
Scanes, C. G. (2017). “Invasive species,” in Animals Hum. Soc., 413–426. doi:10.1016/
B978-0-12-805247-1.00024-1
SCCS (2023). Scientiﬁc Committee on Consumer Safety SCCS OPINION on the safety
of
aluminium
in
cosmetic
products-Submission
III.
European
Commission:
Luxembourg, 1–62.
Schlumpf, M., Durrer, S., Faass, O., Ehnes, C., Fuetsch, M., Gaille, C., et al. (2008).
Developmental toxicity of UV ﬁlters and environmental exposure: a review. Int.
J. Androl. 31 (2), 144–151. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2605.2007.00856.x
Scientiﬁc Committee on Consumer Safety (2021). The SCCS’s notes of guidance for
testing of cosmetic ingredients and their safety. Evaluation. 8th revision.
Scott, F. (2020). ‘The “Toxic Twenty” cosmetic ingredients and contaminants’.
Scott Fabber (2020). The toxic twelve chemicals and contaminants in cosmetics.
Available at: https://www.ewg.org/the-toxic-twelve-chemicals-and-contaminants-in-
cosmetics’
Sharifan, H., Klein, D., and Morse, A. N. (2016). UV ﬁlters are an environmental
threat in the Gulf of Mexico: a case study of Texas coastal zones. Oceanol. Inst. Oceanol.
Pol. Acad. Sci. 58 (4), 327–335. doi:10.1016/j.oceano.2016.07.002
Sheikh, A. G. (2018). Beauty care products - a chemistry deleterious to human
chemistry. Int. J. Med. Sci. Public Health 2018, 1–8. doi:10.5455/ijmsph.2018.
1130118112017
Sherrow, V. (2018). Personal care products council (PCPC). Encycl. Hair, 389–390.
doi:10.5040/9781440880148.0200
Singh, B. M., Jain, A., and Mishra, A. (2018). Cosmetic regulations in India vs.
Globally and challenges in harmonization. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Drug Res. 10 (03), 150–157.
doi:10.25004/ijpsdr.2018.100308
Singh, G. (2019). Mica scavenging in Jharkhand destroys lives and environment.
Mongabay. Available at: https://india.mongabay.com/2019/10/mica-scavenging-in-
jharkhand-destroys-lives-and-environment/.
Siti Zulaikha, R., Sharifah Norkhadijah, S. I., and Praveena, S. M. (2015). Hazardous
ingredients in cosmetics and personal care products and health concern: a review. Public
Health Res. 5 (1), 7–15. doi:10.5923/j.phr.20150501.02
Spangenberg, J. H., Bondeau, A., Carter, T. R., Fronzek, S., Jaeger, J., Jylhä, K., et al.
(2012). Scenarios for investigating risks to biodiversity. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 21 (1),
5–18. doi:10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00620.x
Speer, R. M., Zhou, X., Volk, L. B., Liu, K. J., and Hudson, L. G. (2023). Arsenic and
cancer: evidence and mechanisms. Adv. Pharmacol. 96, 151–202. doi:10.1016/bs.apha.
2022.08.001
Standard, A. I. (2020). ‘Chemical ingrident transparency in products: review of
existing public policies & an industry standard’.
Steiling, W. (2016). Safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients regarding their skin
sensitization potential. Cosmetics 3 (2), 14. doi:10.3390/cosmetics3020014
Tsiouli, S., and Fytianos, G. (2023). “Water pollution by personal care products,” in
Personal Care Prod. Hum. Health, 115–137. doi:10.1016/B978-0-323-99684-6.00002-1
Tunde, O. L., Oluwagbemiga, A. P., and Felix, O. O. (2024). Concentrations and
probable health risks of potentially toxic metals (Pb, Cd and Cr) in some Nigerian
lipstick products. J. Trace Elem. Minerals 8, 100142. Elsevier B. doi:10.1016/j.jtemin.
2024.100142
Ullah, H., Noreen, S., Fozia, H., Rehman, A., Waseem, A., Zubair, S., et al. (2017).
Comparative study of heavy metals content in cosmetic products of different countries
marketed in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. Arabian J. Chem. 10 (1), 10–18. doi:10.
1016/j.arabjc.2013.09.021
UNI EN ISO 22716 (2014). Good manufacturing practices (GMP) – guidelines on
good manufacturing practices. Milano Ente Ital. Uniﬁcazione, 2008. doi:10.3403/
30148492U
U.S. Department of Agriculture (2011). National Organic Program: organic
production and handling requirements. Available at: https://www.nofany.org/ﬁles/
USDA_Organic_Production___Handling_Standards.pdf.
USEPA (2021). Volatile organic compounds’ impact on indoor air quality EPA. GOV,
1–5. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/indoor-air-quality-iaq/indoor-particulate-
matter. doi:10.1007/s11356-021-13435-6
U.S. FDA (2021). Cosmetic products & ingredients. Available at: https://www.fda.
gov/cosmetics/cosmetic-products-ingredients.
Usman, U. L., Danhauwa, S. A., Sajad, S., and Banerjee, S. (2021). Assessment of
heavy metal in some commonly used cosmetic product and associated health risk
in Nigeria: threat to public health. Macromol. Symp. 397 (1). doi:10.1002/masy.
202100161
Vandenberg, L. N., Colborn, T., Hayes, T. B., Heindel, J. J., Jacobs, D. R., Jr., Lee, D. H.,
et al. (2012). Hormones and endocrine-disrupting chemicals: low-dose effects
and nonmonotonic dose responses. Endocr. Rev. 33 (3), 378–455. doi:10.1210/er.
2011-1050
Vanderplanck, M., Gilles, H., Nonclercq, D., Duez, P., and Gerbaux, P. (2020).
Asteraceae paradox: chemical and mechanical protection of taraxacum pollen. Insects 11
(5), 304–308. doi:10.3390/insects11050304
Vella, A., and Attard, E. (2019). Analysis of heavy metal content in conventional and
herbal toothpastes available at Maltese pharmacies. Cosmetics 6 (2), 28. doi:10.3390/
COSMETICS6020028
Wan, M. W. O., Nurzalikha, A. M. S., and Zulfakar, M. H. (2024). The trend of halal
cosmetics supply chain research in a decade: a systematic review and bibliometric
analysis. Inf. Manag. Bus. Rev. 16 (No. 1), 213–228. (ISSN 2220-3796). doi:10.22610/
imbr.v16i1(i).3681
Wang, J., Pan, L., Wu, S., Lu, L., Xu, Y., Zhu, Y., et al. (2016). Recent advances on
endocrine disrupting effects of UV ﬁlters. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 13 (8),
782–811. doi:10.3390/ijerph13080782
Wang, Q., Shao, S., Su, Y., Hu, X., Shen, Y., and Zhao, D. (2019). A novel case of
autogamy and cleistogamy in Dendrobium wangliangii: a rare orchid distributed in the
dry-hot valley. Ecol. Evol. 9 (22), 12906–12914. doi:10.1002/ece3.5772
Wang, Z. (2021). Inﬂuence of climate change on marine species and its solutions. IOP
Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 1011 (1), 012053. doi:10.1088/1755-1315/1011/1/012053
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
24
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

=== Page 25 ===
Wassie, S. B. (2020). Natural resource degradation tendencies in Ethiopia: a review.
Environ. Syst. Res. 9 (1), 33–29. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1186/s40068-020-00194-1
Weatherly, L. M., and Gosse, J. A. (2017). Triclosan exposure, transformation, and
human health effects. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health - Part B Crit. Rev. Taylor & Francis 20
(8), 447–469. doi:10.1080/10937404.2017.1399306
Weryszko-Chmielewska, E., Tietze, M., and Michońska, M. (2012). Ecological
features of the ﬂowers of Aesculus hippocastanum L. and characteristics of Aesculus
L. pollen seasons under the conditions of central-eastern Poland. Acta Agrobot. 65 (4),
61–68. doi:10.5586/aa.2012.022
Whitacre, D. M. (2015). Reviews of environmental contamination and toxicology.
Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10479-9
WHO (2011). Mercury in skin lightening products public health andenvironment.
Dep. Public Health, Environ. Soc. Determinants Health (15), 6. Available at: https://www.
who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-CED-PHE-EPE-19.13. doi:10.1002/9781119992615
Wood, E. (2018). Impacts of sunscreens on coral reefs. Rep. by Int. Coral Reef
Initiative, 1–21. Available at: https://crm.gov.mp/wp-content/uploads/crm/ICRI_
Sunscreen_0.pdf.
Wu, C., Zhang, K., and Xiong, X. (2018). Microplastic pollution in inland waters
focusing on Asia. Handb. Environ. Chem., 85–99. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-61615-5_5
Yadav, E. (2023). The environmental implications of cosmetic chemistry laboratory
waste: a review. Austin Environ. Sci. 8 (3).
Yang, X. E., Wu, X., and Hao, H. l. (2008). Mechanisms and assessment
of water eutrophication. J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B 9 (3), 197–209. doi:10.1631/jzus.
B0710626
Young, O. (2022). ‘The environmental impact of cosmetics is tremendous—here’s
how they’re harmful. Available at: https://www.treehugger.com/environmental-impact-
of-cosmetics-5207672#toc-chemicalingredients’
Yueh, M. F., and Tukey, R. H. (2016). Triclosan: a widespread environmental toxicant
with many biological effects. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 56, 251–272. doi:10.1146/
annurev-pharmtox-010715-103417
Zareba, G., Cernichiari, E., Hojo, R., Nitt, S. M., Weiss, B., Mumtaz, M. M., et al.
(2007). Thimerosal distribution and metabolism in neonatal mice: comparison with
methyl mercury. J. Appl. Toxicol. 27 (July), 511–518. doi:10.1002/jat.1272
Zero Mercury Working Group (2010). Mercury in skin lightening cosmetics. Mercury
Policy Proj., 1–4.
Ziani, K., Ioniţă-Mîndrican, C. B., Mititelu, M., Neacșu, S. M., Negrei, C., Moroșan, E.,
et al. (2023). Microplastics: a real global threat for environment and food safety: a state
of the art review. Nutrients 15 (3), 617. doi:10.3390/nu15030617
Frontiers in Environmental Science
frontiersin.org
25
Wirtu
10.3389/fenvs.2024.1402893

