=== Page 1 ===
Handbook of 
Cosmetic Science 
and Technology
 Third
 Edition
Edited by
  André O. Barel 
Marc Paye 
Howard I. Maibach

=== Page 3 ===
Cover Illustration: Marianne Mahieu
Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.
52 Vanderbilt Avenue
New York, NY 10017
# 2009 by Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.
Informa Healthcare is an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International Standard Book Number-10: 1-4200-6963-2 (Hardcover)
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4200-6963-1 (Hardcover)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material is quoted with
permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish
reliable data and information, but the author and the publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials
or for the consequence of their use.
No part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or
other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://
www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC) 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Handbook of cosmetic science and technology / edited by Andre´ O. Barel,
Marc Paye, Howard I. Maibach. — 3rd ed.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4200-6963-1 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-4200-6963-2 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Cosmetics—
Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Barel, A. O. II. Paye, Marc, 1959- III.
Maibach, Howard I.
[DNLM: 1. Cosmetics. 2. Consumer Product Safety. 3. Skin Care. 4.
Skin. WA 744 H236 2009]
TP983.H24 2009
6680.55—dc22
2008042398
For Corporate Sales and Reprint Permissions call 212-520-2700 or write to: Sales Department, 52 Vanderbilt Avenue,
16th floor, New York, NY 10017.
Visit the Informa Web site at
www.informa.com
and the Informa Healthcare Web site at
www.informahealthcare.com

=== Page 4 ===
Preface
Thanks to the contribution of leading experts in cosmetology, the first editions of the Handbook
were successful and received excellent reviews. The editors appreciate the excellent author
contributions.
The first edition, published in 2001, reviewed the multiple facets of the cosmetic field
including the physiology of cosmetics targets and the safety, legal and regulatory context
worldwide. It gave a broad overview of cosmetic ingredients, vehicles and finished products,
and described the main methodologies used for microbiology, safety and efficacy testing. In
the second edition (2006), we examined the future of cosmetology by the addition of chapters
related to new ingredients, new delivery systems and new testing methodologies, but also by
asking the previous authors to update their chapter with their speculation about the future in
their field of expertise. To make the information more accessible, chapters were significantly
reorganized.
Cosmetic science is a fast moving area. Furthermore, rapid and extensive changes in the
worldwide regulatory context of cosmetics, increasing constraints and limitations in the choice
of cosmetic ingredients and regular pressure from the media force the cosmetic formulator to
think differently about his products. For all those reasons and due to more and more
demanding and educated consumers asking for additional benefits from their cosmetic
products, we have been asked to initiate the third edition of the Handbook.
Several chapters, from previous authors, are key in Handbook of Cosmetic Science and
Technology and have been updated with the latest developments in the given field. However, it
is the intention of the editors to give this version a new and important dimension that will
complement the previous editions; a focus on the mechanism of interaction of the products or
ingredients with their target.
Today, cosmetic products are of a high quality. If we want to further improve their
quality, this will inevitably pass through an even better understanding of how those products
or ingredients work to improve the appearance, protect their target or help maintain its natural
functions. So, with the outstanding evolution of instruments to investigate in depth the skin or
the hair, great progress is made daily in the understanding of the mechanisms of action of
cosmetics. This understanding has been extensively covered in the third edition, which
concentrates on skin, nail and hair cosmetics.
In the third edition, emphasis has been given to:
l
Skin types, their relationship with age, sex, ethnic differences and the concept of
sensitive skin.
l
New bioengineering techniques for studying hydration of the skin – such as skin
capacitance imaging and confocal raman spectroscopy – and for investigating skin
friction and wettability.
l
New developments in the description of skin aging and anti-aging treatments.
l
In vitro skin tests using 3D reconstructed skin models.
l
Specifically targeted cosmetics (decorative products, cooling and revulsive ingredients)
and new forms such as oral cosmetics.
l
An overview of the regulatory context for cosmetic preparations in the USA and in
Europe, and of important ethical considerations in human testing.
l
Finally, and controversially, the values and limitations of bioengineering measure-
ments for the substantiation of efficacy claims.

=== Page 5 ===
The editors are grateful not only to the authors who contributed to previous editions and
updated their chapters for the third edition, but also to the new authors who openly shared
their “know how” in key areas.
Finally, we would like to invite readers’ comments, criticisms and suggestions for
improvements in order to ensure the continuous improvement of the Handbook of Cosmetic
Science and Technology.
Andre´ O. Barel
Marc Paye
Howard I. Maibach
iv
Preface

=== Page 6 ===
Contents
Preface
iii
Contributors
xi
1.
Introduction
1
Marc Paye, Andre´ O. Barel, and Howard I. Maibach
PART I: SKIN TYPES
2.
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
5
Virginie Couturaud
3.
Functional Map and Age-Related Differences in the Human Face:
Nonimmunologic Contact Urticaria Induced by Hexyl Nicotinate
25
Slaheddine Marrakchi and Howard I. Maibach
4.
The Baumann Skin-Type Indicator: A Novel Approach to Understanding
Skin Type
29
Leslie Baumann
5.
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
41
Sarika Saggar, Naissan O. Wesley, Natalie M. Moulton-Levy, and Howard I. Maibach
6.
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and Physiological Factors
59
Miranda A. Farage, Alexandra Katsarou, and Howard I. Maibach
7.
Neurophysiology of Self-Perceived Sensitive-Skin Subjects by Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
75
Bernard Querleux and Olivier de Lacharrie`re
8.
Tests for Sensitive Skin
83
Alessandra Pelosi and Enzo Berardesca
PART II: SKIN HYDRATION
9.
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
91
L. Kilpatrick-Liverman, J. Mattai, R. Tinsley, and J. Wu
10.
Hydrating Substances
107
Marie Lode´n
11.
Skin Care Products
121
Howard Epstein

=== Page 7 ===
12.
Tests for Skin Hydration
135
Bernard Gabard
13.
Skin Capacitance Imaging
141
Emmanuelle Xhauflaire-Uhoda and Ge´rald E. Pie´rard
14.
Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for In Vivo Skin Hydration Measurement
151
Andre´ van der Pol and Peter J. Caspers
PART III: SKIN BARRIER AND pH
15.
The Correlation Between Transepidermal Water Loss and Percutaneous
Absorption: An Overview
165
Jackie Levin and Howard I. Maibach
16.
Role of Calcium in the Regulation of Skin Barrier Homeostasis
173
Hanafi Tanojo, Gena Y.Y. Chang, Jiun-Wen Guo, Xinfan Huang, and Howard I. Maibach
17.
Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers: An Overview
183
Haw-Yueh Thong, Hongbo Zhai, and Howard I. Maibach
18.
Tests for Skin Protection: Barrier Effect
197
Heidi P. Chan, Hongbo Zhai, and Howard I. Maibach
19.
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Studies of Skin Lipid Structure
207
Kouichi Nakagawa
20.
Human Skin Buffering Capacity: An Overview
215
Jackie Levin and Howard I. Maibach
21.
Skin pH and Skin Flora
221
Shamim A. Ansari
PART IV: SKIN AGING AND SUN CARE PRODUCTS
22.
Skin Ageprint: The Causative Factors
233
Ge´rald E. Pie´rard, Claudine Pie´rard-Franchimont, and Pascale Quatresooz
23.
A Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function: Protein,
Glycosaminoglycan, Water, and Lipid Content and Structure
243
Jeanette M. Waller and Howard I. Maibach
24.
Glycation End Products
261
Lieve Declercq, Hugo Corstjens, and Daniel Maes
25.
Spectrophotometric Intracutaneous Analysis (SIAscopy)
275
Paul J. Matts and Symon D. Cotton
26.
The Visioscan-Driven ULEV and SELS Methods
283
Pascale Quatresooz and Ge´rald E. Pie´rard
27.
New Trends in Antiaging Cosmetic Ingredients and Treatments: An Overview
291
Peter Clarys and Andre´ O. Barel
vi
Contents

=== Page 8 ===
28.
Antioxidants
301
Stefan U. Weber, John K. Lodge, Claude Saliou, and Lester Packer
29.
UV Filters
311
Stanley B. Levy
30.
Sun Protection and Sunscreens
323
Bernard Gabard
31.
After-Sun Products
331
Helena Karajiannis and Bernard Gabard
32.
Skin Care Products: Artificial Tanning
339
Stanley B. Levy
33.
Reconstructed Human Skin and Skin Organ Culture Models Used in Cosmetic
Efficacy Testing
345
Alain Mavon, Daniel Bacqueville, and Bart De Wever
PART V: SKIN PERCEPTION
34.
Skin Feel Agents
357
Germaine Zocchi
35.
Silicones—A Key Ingredient in Cosmetic and Toiletry Formulations
371
Isabelle Van Reeth
36.
Sensory Effects and Irritation: A Strong Relationship
381
Miranda A. Farage
37.
Decorative Products
391
Rodolphe Korichi and Jean-Franc¸ois Tranchant
38.
Skin Radiance Measurement
407
A. Petitjean, P. Humbert, S. Mac-Mary, and J. M. Sainthillier
39.
Tribological Studies on Skin: Measurement of the Coefficient of Friction
415
Raja K. Sivamani Gabriel Wu, Howard I. Maibach, and Norm V. Gitis
40.
Skin Wettability and Friction
427
Ahmed Elkhyat, S. Mac-Mary, and P. Humbert
PART VI: SKIN TOLERANCE
41.
Classification of Irritant Contact Dermatitis
437
Ai-Lean Chew and Howard I. Maibach
42.
Principles and Mechanisms of Skin Irritation
443
Sibylle Schliemann, Maria Breternitz, and Peter Elsner
43.
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants and Anti-Irritants for
Surfactant-Based Products
455
Marc Paye
Contents
vii

=== Page 9 ===
44.
In Vivo Irritation
471
Saqib J. Bashir and Howard I. Maibach
45.
Noninvasive Clinical Assessment of Skin Irritation/Inflammation
481
Michael K. Robinson
46.
Detecting Skin Irritation Using Enhanced Visual Scoring: A Sensitive
New Clinical Method
489
Miranda A. Farage
47.
Sodium Lauryl Sulfate—Induced Irritation in the Human Face: Regional
and Age-Related Differences
499
Slaheddine Marrakchi and Howard I. Maibach
48.
Irritation Differences Between Genital and Upper Arm Skin and the Effects
of Emollient Application
505
Miranda A. Farage
49.
Ethnicity as a Possible Endogenous Factor in Irritant Contact Dermatitis: Comparing
the Irritant Response Among Caucasians, Blacks, and Asians
509
Bobeck S. Modjtahedi, Sara P. Modjtahedi, and Howard I. Maibach
50.
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing on SkinEthicTM-Reconstituted Human Epidermis:
Reproducibility for 50 Chemicals Tested with Two Protocols
517
Carine Tornier, Martin Rosdy, and Howard I. Maibach
51.
Reconstructed Corneal and Skin Models
537
Klaus R. Schro¨der
52.
Seawater Salts: Effect on Inflammatory Skin Disease
547
Ivy Lee and Howard I. Maibach
53.
Allergy and Hypoallergenic Products
553
An E. Goossens
54.
Operational Definition of a Causative Contact Allergen—A Study with Six
Fragrance Allergens
563
Jurij J. Hostynek and Howard I. Maibach
55.
Anti-Itch Testing: Antipruritics
573
Heidi P. Chan, Hongbo Zhai, and Howard I. Maibach
56.
Comedogenicity in Rabbit: Some Cosmetic Ingredients/Vehicles
583
Shawn H. Nguyen, Thao P. Dang, and Howard I. Maibach
PART VII: TARGETED COSMETICS
57.
Skin-Whitening Agents
587
Hongbo Zhai and Howard I. Maibach
58.
Skin Whitening: New Hydroquinone Combination
597
Leslie Baumann and Lucy K. Martin
viii
Contents

=== Page 10 ===
59.
Anticellulite Products and Treatments
603
Andre´ O. Barel
60.
Baby Care Products
613
Marie Lemper, Kristien De Paepe, Vera Rogiers, and Ralf Adam
61.
Cosmetics for the Elderly
625
T. Blatt, G.-M- Muhr, and F. Sta¨b
62.
Antiperspirants
631
Jo¨rg Schreiber
63.
Deodorants
643
Jo¨rg Schreiber
64.
Revulsive Products: Way of Action and Evaluation of Their Efficacy
653
Peter Clarys, Andre´ O. Barel, and Ron Clijsen
65.
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action
661
John C. Leffingwell
66.
Oral Cosmetics
677
Nathalie Demeester, Dirk Vanden Berghe, Mario R. Calomme, and Andre´ O. Barel
67.
Hair Conditioners
687
Charles Reich, Dean Su, Cheryl Kozubal, and Zhi Lu
68.
Measuring Hair
705
R. Randall Wickett and Janusz Jachowicz
69.
The Normal Nail
737
Josette Andre´
70.
Nail Cosmetics: Handle of Skin Care
745
Josette Andre´ and Robert Baran
PART VIII: COSMETICS VEHICLE
71.
Surfactants: Classification
769
Louis Oldenhove de Guertechin
72.
Encapsulation to Deliver Topical Actives
787
Joce´lia Jansen
73.
Elastic Vesicles as Topical/Transdermal Drug Delivery Systems
797
Myeong Jun Choi and Howard I. Maibach
74.
Polymers Effect on Chemical Partition Coefficient Between Powdered Human
Stratum Corneum and Water
809
Ronald C. Wester, Xiaoying Hui, Philip G. Hewitt, Jurij J. Hostynek, Howard I. Maibach,
Scott Krauser, and Thomas Chan
Contents
ix

=== Page 11 ===
PART IX: ETHICS AND REGULATIONS
75.
General Concepts of Ethics in Human Testing
813
Klaus E. Andersen
76.
Values and Limitations of Bioengineering Measurements
819
Peter Clarys and Andre´ O. Barel
77.
The Current Regulatory Context in the European Union
825
Marleen Pauwels and Vera Rogiers
78.
Trends in Cosmetic Regulations in the U.S.A.
839
F. Anthony Simion
Index
845
x
Contents

=== Page 12 ===
Contributors
Ralf Adam
Procter & Gamble Service GmbH, Schwalbach am Taunus, Germany
Klaus E. Andersen
Department of Dermatology, Odense University Hospital, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
Josette Andre´
Department of Dermatology, Centres Hospitaliers Universitaires Saint-Pierre &
Brugmann, and Hoˆpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium
Shamim A. Ansari
Colgate-Palmolive Company, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Daniel Bacqueville
Skin Pharmacokinetics Laboratory, Pierre Fabre Dermo-Cosme´tique,
Castanet-Tolosan, France
Robert Baran
Nail Disease Centre, Cannes, France
Andre´ O. Barel
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium
Saqib J. Bashir
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Leslie Baumann
University of Miami, Cosmetic Medicine and Research Institute, Miami, Florida,
U.S.A.
Enzo Berardesca
San Gallicano Dermatological Institute, Rome, Italy
Dirk Vanden Berghe
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical,
Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
T. Blatt
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany
Maria Breternitz
Department of Dermatology, University of Jena, Jena, Germany
Mario R. Calomme
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical,
Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
Peter J. Caspers
River Diagnostics BV, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Heidi P. Chan
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Thomas Chan
MacroChem Corporation, Lexington, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
Gena Y.Y. Chang,
Genepharm, Inc., Sunnyvale, California, U.S.A.

=== Page 13 ===
Ai-Lean Chew
St. John’s Institute of Dermatology, Guy’s and St. Thomas’ Hospital, London, U.K.
Peter Clarys
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium
Ron Clijsen
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium and University College Thim van der Laan AG, Landquart, Switzerland
Hugo Corstjens
Biological Research Department Europe, Este´e Lauder Companies, Oevel,
Belgium
Symon D. Cotton
Astron Clinica, Cambridge, U.K.
Virginie Couturaud
CERCO, Centre d’Etude et de Recherche en COsme´tologie, Paris, France
Thao P. Dang
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Olivier de Lacharrie`re
L’Ore´al Recherche, Clichy, France
Kristien De Paepe
Department of Toxicology, Dermato-Cosmetology and Pharmacognosy,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
Bart De Wever
Business Development, Phenion GmbH & Co.KG, Du¨sseldorf, Germany
Lieve Declercq
Biological Research Department Europe, Este´e Lauder Companies, Oevel, Belgium
Nathalie Demeester
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical,
Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
Ahmed Elkhyat
Department of Dermatology, CHU Saint-Jacques, University of Franche-Comte´,
Besanc¸on, France
Peter Elsner
Department of Dermatology, University of Jena, Jena, Germany
Howard Epstein
EMD Chemicals Inc., Gibbstown, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Miranda A. Farage
Feminine Clinical Sciences Innovation Center, The Procter & Gamble
Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Bernard Gabard
iderma Scientific Consulting, Basel, Switzerland
Norm V. Gitis
Center for Tribology, Inc., Campbell, California, U.S.A.
An E. Goossens
University Hospital, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Jiun-Wen Guo
Genepharm, Inc., Sunnyvale, California, U.S.A.
Philip G. Hewitt
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Jurij J. Hostynek
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Xinfan Huang
Genepharm, Inc., Sunnyvale, California, U.S.A.
xii
Contributors

=== Page 14 ===
Xiaoying Hui
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
P. Humbert
Research and Studies Center on the Integument (CERT), Saint-Jacques University
Hospital, Besanc¸on, France
Janusz Jachowicz
Better Cosmetics, LLC, Bethel, Connecticut, U.S.A.
Joce´lia Jansen
Pharmaceutical Science Department, State University of Ponta Grossa, Ponta
Grossa, Parana´, Brazil
Myeong Jun Choi
Korea Clinical Research Center Co., Ltd., Gyeonggi-do, Korea
Helena Karajiannis
iderma Scientific Consulting, Basel, Switzerland
Alexandra Katsarou
Department of Dermatology, University of Athens Medical School,
Athens, Greece
L. Kilpatrick-Liverman
Colgate-Palmolive Technology Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Rodolphe Korichi
Cutaneous Biology and Objectivation Department, LVMH Recherche,
Perfumes & Cosmetics, Saint Jean de Braye, France
Cheryl Kozubal
Colgate-Palmolive Technical Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Scott Krauser
MacroChem Corporation, Lexington, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
Ivy Lee
Department of Dermatology, Washington Hospital Center–Georgetown University,
Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
John C. Leffingwell
Leffingwell & Associates, Canton, Georgia, U.S.A.
Marie Lemper
Department of Toxicology, Dermato-Cosmetology and Pharmacognosy,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
Jackie Levin
AZCOM, Glendale, Arizona, U.S.A.
Stanley B. Levy
Department of Dermatology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, and Revlon Research Center, Edison, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Marie Lode´n
Research & Development, ACO Hud Nordic AB, Upplands Va¨sby, Sweden
John K. Lodge
University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K.
Zhi Lu
Colgate-Palmolive Technical Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
S. Mac-Mary
Skinexigence SAS, Saint-Jacques University Hospital, Besanc¸on, France
Daniel Maes
Research and Development, Este´e Lauder Companies, Melville, New York, U.S.A.
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Slaheddine Marrakchi
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Contributors
xiii

=== Page 15 ===
Lucy K. Martin
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, Division of Cosmetic
Dermatology, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, U.S.A.
J. Mattai
Colgate-Palmolive Technology Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Paul J. Matts
Procter & Gamble, Egham, U.K.
Alain Mavon
Skin Pharmacokinetics Laboratory, Pierre Fabre Dermo-Cosme´tique,
Castanet-Tolosan, France
Bobeck S. Modjtahedi
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Sara P. Modjtahedi
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Natalie M. Moulton-Levy
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of
Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
G.-M- Muhr
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany
Kouichi Nakagawa
RI Research Center, Fukushima Medical University, Hikarigaoka,
Fukushima, Japan
Shawn H. Nguyen
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Louis Oldenhove de Guertechin
Lie`ge, Belgium
Lester Packer
Pharmacology & Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, U.S.A.
Marleen Pauwels
Department of Toxicology, Dermato-Cosmetology and Pharmacognosy,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
Marc Paye
Colgate-Palmolive R&D, Herstal, Belgium
Alessandra Pelosi
San Gallicano Dermatological Institute, Rome, Italy
A. Petitjean
Research and Studies Center on the Integument (CERT), Saint-Jacques University
Hospital, Besanc¸on, France
Claudine Pie´rard-Franchimont
Department of Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Lie`ge,
Lie`ge, Belgium
Ge´rald E. Pie´rard
Department of Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
Pascale Quatresooz
Department of Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Lie`ge, Lie`ge,
Belgium
Bernard Querleux
L’Ore´al Recherche, Aulnay-sous-bois, France
Charles Reich
Colgate-Palmolive Technical Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Michael K. Robinson
Global Biotechnology, The Procter & Gamble Company, Miami Valley
Innovation Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
xiv
Contributors

=== Page 16 ===
Vera Rogiers
Department of Toxicology, Dermato-Cosmetology and Pharmacognosy, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
Martin Rosdy
SkinEthic Laboratories, Nice, France
Sarika Saggar
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
J. M. Sainthillier
Skinexigence SAS, Saint-Jacques University Hospital, Besanc¸on, France
Claude Saliou
Johnson & Johnson Asia Pacific, A Division of Johnson & Johnson Pte. Ltd.,
Singapore
Sibylle Schliemann
Department of Dermatology, University of Jena, Jena, Germany
Klaus R. Schro¨der
Henkel AG & Co. KgaA, Du¨sseldorf, Germany
Jo¨rg Schreiber
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany
F. Anthony Simion
Kao Brands Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Raja K. Sivamani
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
F. Sta¨b
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany
Dean Su
Colgate-Palmolive Technical Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Hanafi Tanojo
Genepharm, Inc., Sunnyvale, California, U.S.A.
Haw-Yueh Thong
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
R. Tinsley
Colgate-Palmolive Technology Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Carine Tornier
SkinEthic Laboratories, Nice, France
Jean-Franc¸ois Tranchant
Innovative Materials and Technology Department, LVMH Recherche,
Perfumes & Cosmetics, Saint Jean de Braye, France
Andre´ van der Pol
River Diagnostics BV, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Isabelle Van Reeth
Dow Corning (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China
Jeanette M. Waller
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Stefan U. Weber
Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University of Bonn
Medical Center, Bonn, Germany
Naissan O. Wesley
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Ronald C. Wester
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
R. Randall Wickett
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Contributors
xv

=== Page 17 ===
Gabriel Wu
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
J. Wu
Colgate-Palmolive Technology Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Emmanuelle Xhauflaire-Uhoda
Department of Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Lie`ge,
Lie`ge, Belgium
Hongbo Zhai
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine,
San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Germaine Zocchi
Villers-aux-Tours, Belgium
xvi
Contributors

=== Page 18 ===
1
Introduction
Marc Paye
Colgate-Palmolive R&D, Herstal, Belgium
Andre´ O. Barel
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Although cosmetics for the purpose of beautifying, perfuming, cleansing, or rituals have
existed since the origin of civilization, only in the 20th century has great progress been made in
the diversification of products and functions and in the safety and protection of the consumer.
Before 1938, cosmetics were not regulated as drugs, and cosmetology could often be
considered as a way to sell dreams rather than objective efficacy; safety for consumers was also
sometimes precarious. Subsequently, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), through the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, regulated cosmetics that were required to be safe for
the consumer.
With industrialization, many new ingredients from several industries (oleo- and
petrochemical, food, etc.) were used in preparation of cosmetics, offering a list of new
functions and forms. For a better control of these ingredients, U.S. laws required ingredient
classification and product labeling since 1966.
In Europe, the Council Directive 76/768/EEC of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the
laws of the member states relating to cosmetic products (“Cosmetics Directive”) was adopted
in 1976 to ensure the free circulation of cosmetic products and improve the safety of cosmetic
products by placing the responsibility of the product on the cosmetic manufacturer.
In 1991, the Cosmetics Directive was amended for the sixth time and prohibited the
marketing of cosmetic products containing ingredients or combinations of ingredients tested
on animals, as of 1998.
With the seventh amendment of the European Cosmetic Directive in 2003, a testing ban
on finished cosmetic products was applied after 11 September 2004, whereas the testing ban on
ingredients or combination of ingredients will be applied as soon as alternative methods are
validated and adopted, with a maximum deadline of 11 March 2009, irrespective of the
availability of alternative non–animal tests. For some endpoints (repeated-dose toxicity,
reproductive toxicity, and toxicokinetics), a maximum deadline of 11 March 2013 was set up.
With regard to products, the latest innovation in the field of cosmetics is the development
of active cosmetics (cosmeceuticals in the United States). Currently, cosmetics intend not only to
improve the appearance or odor of the consumer but also to benefit their target, whether it is the
skin, hair, nail, mucous membrane, or tooth. With this functional approach, products became
diversified and started to claim a multitude of biologic actions. The cosmetic market then
greatly extended with millions of consumers worldwide. The competitive environment pushed
manufacturers to promise more to the consumers and to develop cosmetic products of better
quality and higher efficacy. Today, many cosmetic products aim at hydrating the skin, reducing
or slowing the signs of aged skin, and protecting the skin barrier and the skin in its entity
against the multitude of daily environmental aggressions. For cosmetic products to support
these activities, raw materials became more efficacious, safe, bioavailable, and innovative, while
remaining affordable. With the continuous improvement of basic sciences and the development
of new sciences, new sources for pure raw material have been found. Raw materials are not
only produced from natural sources and are highly purified, but they can also be specifically
synthesized or even produced from genetically manipulated microorganisms. However, the
availability and use of these sophisticated and active ingredients are not always sufficient for
them to be optimally delivered to their targets and to sustain their activity. The cosmetic vehicle
is also crucial to obtain this effect, and the role of the formulator is to combine the right
ingredient into the appropriate vehicle. Cosmetology has thus become a science in its own, and
the cosmetologist is not only a formulator chemist anymore but also a real-life science scientist
who needs to fully understand the interaction of his or her products and ingredients with their

=== Page 19 ===
targets to deliver the promised benefits. This is the reason why, in this third edition of the
“Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology,” the priority has been given to explaining the
mechanism of action of cosmetic ingredients and products with their target.
Additional sciences also developed at parallel to active cosmetology and contributed
significantly to its rise; this is the case for biometric techniques, which have been developing
for more than two decades and allow a progressive and noninvasive investigation of many
skin properties. Instruments and methods are available to objectively evaluate and measure
cutaneous elasticity, topography, hydration, and turnover rate or even to see directly in vivo
inside the skin through microscope evolution. Major innovations in the field are reported by
the International Society for Biophysics and Imaging of the Skin. Guidelines for the
appropriate usage of instrumental techniques and the accurate measurement of skin function
and properties were published by expert groups such as the Standardization Group of the
European Society of Contact Dermatitis or the European Group for Efficacy Measurement of
Cosmetics and Other Topical Products (EEMCO). Any claimed effect of a cosmetic on the skin
should today find appropriate techniques for a clear demonstration. Several other books
describe in details all these methods, and so purposefully we have been very selective in this
edition to cover only some very new, and maybe not so well known today, bioengineering
methodologies that are emerging or are complementing other chapters of this handbook.
For better protection of the consumer against misleading claims, national or federal laws
prohibit false advertisement of cosmetic products. In Europe, the sixth amendment of the
European Directive on Cosmetic Products requires manufacturers to have readily available a
dossier with the proof of the claims made on their products. The seventh amendment of the
European Directive, published in March 2004, among several other requirements explained
later in this book, also made information about the product more easily accessible to the public
by any appropriate means, including electronic means.
Currently, big changes in the regulatory context are taking place and will greatly impact
the cosmetic market. A recast of the European Cosmetic Directive has been adopted and is
waiting for implementation very soon; this will strengthen consumer protection by limiting
further the use of some ingredients and implementing stricter rules of postmarketing
surveillance. The implementation of REACH (Registration, Evaluation, and Authorization of
CHemicals) will also have implications by limiting the number of ingredients available to the
cosmetic industry and creating high pressure on small and middle-size enterprises (SMEs). At
a later stage, we may also expect changes in ingredient availabilities at a global level, with the
set up of the global harmonization system (GHS). All the changes in the regulatory context are
often an “affair of specialists,” and we are proud to have real experts who have accepted to
discuss the latest developments in that field for the purpose of this handbook.
Another topic that is clearly of interest today is the replacement of animal testing
by alternative methods for testing the safety of cosmetic ingredients. The cosmetic industry, by
separate activities or via its association, the COLIPA (The “European Cosmetic, Toiletry, and
Perfumery Association”), has been extremely active in developing in vitro methods and
strategies for confirming the safety of their ingredients. Even if much work has still to be done,
great progress has been realized. Some updates on method developments are described in this
book, although it has not been possible to cover all of them.
Finally, cosmetology has become a science based on the combination of various expertise
domains: chemistry, physics, biology, bioengineering, dermatology, microbiology, toxicology,
statistics, and many others.
Because of such a complexity in cosmetic science, it was not possible to cover in a useful
manner all the aspects in one book. Details in most of the above fields are covered in the
different volumes of the “Cosmetic Science and Technology” series. In the first edition of the
“Handbook of Cosmetic Sciences and Technologies,” we especially aimed at producing a useful
formulation guide and a source of ideas for developing modern cosmetics. Four years later,
with the second edition of the handbook, about 20 chapters were added, while the others were
updated by trying to cover the most recent innovations in terms of ingredients and cosmetic
vehicle forms that should orient the type of products of the future. The third edition is very
different from the first two. A few chapters were updated from the first editions, but most are
new, and the outstanding contributors were asked to deeply explain the science behind the
products, ingredients, or methodology. Thus, the third edition may be seen, in some instances,
as complementary to the two first editions.
2
Paye et al.

=== Page 20 ===
The third edition of the handbook has been reorganized and subdivided into nine
sections, including several chapters written by different authors. It may seem to some as too
many chapters, but the editors chose this format intentionally to guarantee that each subject be
described by a recognized expert in his/her field who is well aware of the latest development
in the topic. Also, authors were selected worldwide. Indeed, cosmetology is universal, but
there exists some regional specificity, which had to be addressed.
The first part of the handbook provides the reader with an overview of the different kind
of skin types and their specificities. This is especially important at a time when cosmetic
products become more and more diversified and targeted to ethnic skin, sensitive skin,
elderlies, or others.
“Skin Hydration” (part II), “Skin Barrier” and “Skin pH” (part III) are then addressed
from product or ingredient, mechanism, and assessment perspectives. Part IV (“Skin Aging
and Sun Care products”) covers the latest development in terms of skin aging and sun care
products, which represent a large contribution to the current cosmetic business.
Today, consumers are not satisfied anymore with the claims made on cosmetic products;
they also want to see or perceive any claimed property of their product. This is why part V,
devoted to skin perception, has been introduced with recent developments in measuring what
has long been considered as subjective and not measurable. Covering various aspects of skin
tolerance is an important section of the handbook (part VI) and provides the reader with up-to-
date information on the mechanism of skin irritation, last developments about in vitro
predictive methods, specificities related to body sites or skin types, and expert view on
allergenicity and allergens.
The sections “Targeted Cosmetics” (part VII) and “Cosmetic Vehicles” (part VIII) have
been considerably reduced in the third edition and intentionally focused on emerging products
that will represent, for most of them, new trends in cosmetology. For more conventional
cosmetic products, the reader is referred to some excellent chapters from the two first editions.
Finally, the last section, “Ethics and Regulations” (part IX), provides a clear overview of the
quickly evolving worldwide regulatory context and ethical requirements that should always
lead any development and testing of new products.
Given the number of contributions, it has been a challenge to edit this third edition, only
four years after the second; if it has been possible, it is because of the dedication of the authors
and great support of Mrs. S. Beberman and D Bigelow from Informa Healthcare Inc. We thank
all of them for making this enormous task easy, enjoyable, and fascinating.
Introduction
3

=== Page 22 ===
2
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in
Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
Virginie Couturaud
CERCO, Centre d’Etude et de Recherche en COsme´tologie, Paris, France
INTRODUCTION
The skin mainly intends to protect human beings against environmental aggressions.
It fills this “barrier” part through a complex structure whose external part is made up by
the stratum corneum—a horny layer covered with a hydrolipidic protective film. This function
is only ensured when this horny layer made up of the accumulation of dead cells is properly
moisturized as the water is the keratin plasticizer.
The underlying epidermis also enables to reinforce the skin’s defense capacity by
ensuring the continuous and functional regeneration of the surface state (keratogenesis) and
skin pigmentation (melanogenesis).
The dermis also plays this part and appears as a nutritional structure whose function is
also particularly important for the maintenance, coherence, elasticity, and thermoregulation of
the whole skin.
Finally, the hypodermis has a protective and reserve function.
According to its state, activity, and defense capacity, the skin can have different
appearances directly related to the water and fatty content of the hydrolipidic film.
Fatty deficiency, indispensable for retaining water in the teguments, favors its
evaporation and therefore skin drying, whereas an excess of lipidic components favors a
state defined as oily.
Among the numerous skin classifications that are proposed, the one most closely
connected with cosmetological requirements distinguishes four different types: normal, oily,
dry, and mixed.
However, in practice, such a classification must be used cautiously. In fact, the words
used are ambiguous and lead to various interpretations; the criteria of selection to define each
category are difficult to standardize since they vary from one case to another, some
observations can even correspond to opposite clinical profiles.
So, for example, severe changes in epidermal water content associated with superficial
pH changes can modify the skin’s appearance and lead one to establish a visual diagnosis of
dry skin, whereas it may be actually an oily skin.
For a long time, the research undertaken to try to understand the mechanisms leading to
structural modifications of the skin have been limited, the researchers focused more on the
practical consequences than on the causes.
From now on, more recent works would lead to progress significantly, but presently the
different classifications taken as the authority are still based on the clinical observation instead
of being based on the measurement of the biological parameters involved.
Dry skin would mainly correspond to structural and functional modifications of the
components of the epidermis.
Oily skin would result from an excessive seborrheic production, invading skin surface
and possibly hair.
Resulting from totally independent processes, oily skin and dry skin therefore
correspond to two states that must not be opposed to each other, as some skins can be
“dry” or “oily” and dehydrated at the same time.
The biophysical characteristics of skin also vary according to sex and age and can differ
for the same subject according to the anatomical site considered.
Finally, the distribution of these different types of skin widely varies according to the
ethnical group we are referring to.

=== Page 23 ===
A standardization of the skin typologies based only on visual criteria therefore appears
difficult and would require in the more or less long term to resort to other quantitative means
of identification, notably referring to biochemical and biophysical data.
After a quick reminder of the parameters on which the traditional classifications are
based, an overview of the incidence of race, age, sex, and anatomical site on the measurement
of the various skin biophysical characteristics will be proposed to show the limits of any kind
of classification.
CLASSIFICATION BY THE SKIN TYPES
With a weight of about 4 kg and a surface of about 1.8 m2, the skin is the widest organ of the
organism: Its constitution is approximately the same at qualitative level and on the whole
body. However, it undergoes notable variations especially concerning its thickness, its
components, and above all, the way and variety of implantation of the skin appendices. These
variations enable the skin to have a perfect functional adaptation.
In addition to its main protective part, the skin also ensures numerous other essential
functions such as permeation, metabolism, and thermoregulation and actively contributes to
the sensorial function. This structural and functional diversity is influenced by intrinsic factors
related to subjects, their ethnic group, their age, and their physiological, psychological, and
pathological state and by extrinsic factors related to the immediate environment such as the
dryness level, sun exposure, temperature, and wind.
Numerous skin classifications have been proposed; they are all privilege-specific criteria.
So, from a cosmetic point of view, the reference criteria are the users’ feelings and therefore the
surface state of their skin and their capacity for seduction and even attraction. There is a
connotation of well-being and pleasure. This selective criterion generally leads to classification
of the skin into four main types, which still remain to be clearly defined, i.e., normal skin, dry
skin, oily skin, and mixed skin.
These denominations, based more on the feeling than on the causes, are imprecise and
even erroneous and entertain in practice significant misunderstandings between biologists and
consumers, which will have to be progressively raised.
The improvement of the knowledge of the mechanisms involved actually leads one to
progressively better differentiate what corresponds to an evolutionary process from a
particular and immutable skin typology. If it is true, for example, that the dry skin often has a
genetic component (1), most of the people experienced it at a given moment of their life
(because of the climatic conditions, etc.). In the same way, most of the people at a given stage of
their hormonal and sexual development had to face the troubles related to an oily or mixed
skin.
Normal Skin
Contrary to all expectations, it is worth noting that there is no definition of normal skin, the
latter being qualified in comparison with the other skin types: a normal skin is not a dry skin,
not an oily skin, not a mixed skin, and no more a pathological skin.
A brief analysis of its structure and of its functions enables to draw a more positive
definition of the normal skin.
At the more external level, there is a very thin protective epithelium that constitutes the
epidermis. It plays the main part in protecting the organism against external aggressions,
notably ensured through the cohesion of epithelial cells and the keratinocytes that undergo a
specific process of differentiation as they migrate from the dermoepidermal junction to the
skin surface. This cohesion results from intercellular ties caused by the desmosomes, which
are mainly responsible for the very great mechanical resistance of the epidermis. However, the
migration of the keratinocytes remains possible since these desmosomal ties are submitted to a
continuous process of dissolution and reconstitution associated with a progressive decrease in
their adherence strength.
Keratinization corresponds to the most important structural and biochemical change that
the epithelial cells undergo. Through this process they synthesize keratin, a fibrous complex
protein whose structure evolves during cell differentiation. This process starts at basal level
and ends with the transition between keratinocytes and corneocytes, which are cells mainly
6
Couturaud

=== Page 24 ===
full of a fibrous material. Corneocytes in degradation and intercellular lipids form a horny
cover that reinforces the solidity and mechanical resistance of the stratum corneum, which also
depends on the corneocytar supply in water.
In addition to this mechanical protection, the epidermis also has, through its structure
and the presence of specialized cells such as the melanocytes, Merkel cells, and Langerhans’
cells, other more complex functions, among which are the regeneration of tissue, the exchanges
with the medium, and the active defense against external aggressions.
At intermediate level, the dermis, a dense conjunctive tissue, is much thicker than the
epidermis to which it is connected by the dermoepidermal junction, which is the area not only
of cohesion but also of intense exchanges.
This conjunctive tissue is globally made up of an amorphous extracellular substance in
which more or less mobile cells float, the whole being kept together by a frame of elastic and
collagen fibers. Numerous vessels, nerve fibers, and appendices with main functions, notably
the sweat and sebaceous glands and the hair follicles, go through the fundamental substance.
Among the cells, it is worth noting the presence of fibrocytes with proliferative capacity,
responsible for the synthesis and maintenance of the extracellular material, of histiocytes, mast
cells, and leukocytes, involved in nonspecific defense and in immune supervision.
Because of its structure and the distribution of its components, the dermis is generally
divided into two areas. The reticular dermis, thicker than the dermis and mainly made up of an
interlacing of collagen fibers, is the place where the lower parts of the appendices are located,
ensuring the hypodermal junction. It mainly has a mechanical function through its capacity for
deformation (extensibility and compressibility). The papillary dermis, at the dermoepidermal
junction, fairly loose, much vascularized, and rich in nerve fibers and endings. It therefore has
multiple functions: enabling the nutritional exchanges with the epidermis and regulating the
capacity for percutaneous absorption through its vascular and lymphatic networks, providing
protection against aggressions and mechanical deformations through its fibrillar texture,
ensuring sensory perception by the presence of most of the nerve endings, providing defense
against foreign bodies by participating in the immune inflammatory and phagocytic processes
through the existence of specialized cells, and maintaining tissue reconstruction.
Finally, at the most internal level, the hypodermis, which consists of loose conjunctive
tissue, is linked to the lower part of the dermis by expansions of collagen fibers and elastic
fibers of different thickness according to the anatomical areas. This tissue mainly contains
adipocytes full of triglycerides, histiocytes, and mast cells. Its vascularization and innervation
also vary according to the anatomical locations.
The hypodermis mainly has the function of protecting and reserving fat. Its mechanical
properties are very badly known, but by enabling the skin to move as a whole on the
underlying levels, this skin layer plays a main part in the breaking of the external strengths of
deformation. In fact, it has been observed that the cicatricial elimination of the hypodermis
results in a significant increase in the constraints of skin extension or friction due to a loss of
mobility (2).
Therefore, considering its structure and its functions, a normal skin should be a smooth
skin, pleasant to touch, because of the cohesion of the cells of its more superficial layers; a firm
and supple skin because of the existence of a dense supportive tissue and of the presence of
numerous elastic fibers of good quality; a mat skin through its balanced seborrheic production;
a clear and pinkish skin because of the perfect functionality of its microcirculatory network.
In reality, a skin complying with all these characteristics would only exist in the healthy
child before his/her puberty (3).
At cosmetological level, we must be content with a less strong definition and consider
normal skin as a young skin, structurally and functionally balanced and requiring no care
apart from those necessary for its cleaning.
Dry Skin
The concept of dry skin has also never been clearly defined. The term “dry skin” conceals
several complementary or opposite points of view (4). It remains completely different from the
way it is approached. People connect this notion to the effects observed and to their sensorial
dimension. Therefore, for them it is first of all a feeling of drying along with loss of skin
suppleness and elasticity, characterized by a rough appearance often associated with an
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
7

=== Page 25 ===
important desquamation, and leading to a certain discomfort they intend to correct by using
moisturizing products.
For the biologist, the xerosis would be first the consequence of a change of the coherence
and functionality of corneocytes, the water deficiency of the superficial layers of the stratum
corneum, when it exists, only resulting from it.
As a matter of fact, the physiopathogeny of most xerosis is still badly known, and it
remains difficult to distinguish the causes from the consequences of these skin abnormalities (5).
As it has been said before, in normal condition, the corneal layer is made up of a regular
assembly of corneocytes, forming a structure of modulated thickness with unique physical
qualities (5).
Each corneocyte contains dampening substances called NMFs (natural moisturizing
factors), resulting from the enzymatic degradation of the fillagrines, which fix a certain
quantity of inter-corneocytar water and therefore exert a decreasing osmotic pressure as they
migrate to the surface (5).
Any decrease in the enzymatic function therefore plays an important part on the NMF
content and consequently on the osmotic pressure and on the opening of corneosomes,
consequently easing a disorganized desquamation as it is observed with xerosis (5).
This dysfunction actually depends on a qualitative and quantitative change of enzymes
and/or on an inadequate change of the pH of the corneum (6). The inter-corneocytar cohesion
also depends on a complex mixture of lipids that constitute the lamellar structure interposed
between the corneocytes (made up of fatty acids, sterols, and ceramides coming from the
keratinosomes) (5).
Whereas most of the research focused on the study of the change of the function of the
horny layer and of its constitution and led to the theory of moisture balance (7–12), few works
have been undertaken to better understand the components of the epidermal cells that are
involved in skin drying. Such works will enable better understanding of the mechanisms that
lead to xerosis.
Previous studies have shown the importance of four factors predisposing to dry skin:
1.
the lack of water of corneocytes, directly depending on the presence of NMF;
2.
the epidermal hyper-proliferation, resulting from a deficiency in the renewal process
of the keratinocytes;
3.
the change of lipidic synthesis at cell level; and
4.
the deterioration of the functionality of skin barrier, following a degradation of
intercellular cohesion.
All these factors are interdependent.
Consequently, dry skin should be characterized by its rough appearance, without
referring to its hydration level (13).
Recent research have actually questioned some established ideas notably the influence of
the inflammatory process or of the content in calcium ions of the epithelial cells in skin drying.
In fact, experimental results have shown that the supply of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
agents (14) or of calcic regulators (15) did not significantly modify the skin’s state. On the other
hand, the use of specific inhibitors of tryptic proteases, and particularly of “plasminogen
activation system,” showed a capacity for restoring the normal state of the skin and for
simultaneously suppressing all the changes related to skin drying, notably against the
mechanisms of cell regulation and differentiation, of increase in transepidermal water loss
(TEWL) of the horny layer, of acceleration of its renewal, and the epidermal thickness resulting
from it (16).
From now on, these works enable to confirm that skin drying does not correspond to an
irreversible state but results from a dysfunction involving the traditional “balance moisture
theory” (17) and the “protease regulation theory,” resulting from these new research (16).
As already seen, dry skin depends on numerous biological factors (13); its reparation
implies the restoration of the epidermal barrier, actually damaged by the loss of fat and
dehydration of the superficial layers of the stratum corneum.
Such changes are more easily objectivable in African-American subjects in whom the skin
takes a perfectly visible ashy appearance. It is also advisable not to systematically associate dry
8
Couturaud

=== Page 26 ===
skin with old skin even if in elder subjects (18), as in them we globally note a decrease in the
hygroscopic quality of the stratum corneum and in the desquamation of corneocytes and the
retention of keratin, contributing to give a drier and rougher appearance to the skin (19).
Oily Skin
Whereas dry skin reflects a functional change of different skin components, the oily skin
results from an overactivity of the sebaceous glands, leading to an overproduction of sebum
overflowing on the skin, giving it a characteristic oily and shiny appearance.
In fact, sebum results from the disintegration of specific cells, the sebocytes, a short time
before they are secreted from the sebaceous gland. Once again it results from a cell
differentiation. Originally, sebum contains squalene, waxes, triglycerides, and sterols. Under
the effect of resident bacteria, one part of the triglycerides is immediately hydrolyzed, and the
main part of the cholesterol is esterified, the sebum excreted containing a significant quantity
of free fatty acids contributing to the acidity of the pH of the skin surface.
Then this sebum blends with epidermal lipids produced from the destruction of the
desquamated horny cells that also contain triglycerides and cholesterol to form the surface
lipidic film covering the stratum corneum.
Human beings have the particularity to have at their disposal sebaceous glands almost
all over the body, but their activity is not the same on all the anatomical sites. The production
of sebum is more important on head, face, neck, shoulders, and thorax, areas where a
hyperseborrhea can be the conjunction of a high production of the glands and of a greater
number of glands (20).
Sebum is a natural skin detergent that gives the skin an amphiphilic wettability through
the presence of free fatty acids and wax (21). It also plays a part in the maintenance of the
functional qualities of hairs, a fungistatic activity, while having a nutritional function for
bacterial species useful for the organism, and finally, a protective function against excessive
dehydration in a dry environment through its effect on the epidermal barrier function, even if
the sebum is not known to have a dampening activity (22) and has no influence on the skin’s
hydration level (23).
The change of its rate of production depends on genetic, endocrinic, and environmental
factors (24).
The opposite of oily skin would not be dry skin since they can coexist, for example, on
face. Such a statement is currently supported by many workers (25).
Actually, young children fairly never have seborrheic outbreak before the age of seven
years, when the first secretion of androgenic precursors starts to form. This production will
progress to reach its maximum at adolescence and then decrease with age.
It is also worth noting the racial differences related to sex—men globally having an oilier
skin than women (19). Finally, at cosmetological level, it must be retained that oily skin is
sometimes erythrosic, easily irritable, and particularly fragile.
Mixed Skin
It corresponds to a complex skin where the different types previously described coexist on
different areas of body or face. The characteristic example is the face, where solid and oily skin
with well-dilated pores on the medio-facial area can coexist with a fragile skin with fine grains
on cheeks.
Such a skin requires conjugating the particularities and sensitivities peculiar to normal,
dry, and oily skins.
A Peculiar Case: The Sensitive Skin
Racial, individual, and intra-regional differences in the skin reactivity to a number of external
stimuli have been widely documented during the last 20 years. Contradictory findings about
sensitive skin have been reported. However, the general belief is that such a specific reactivity,
more frequent in the populations with light skin, corresponds to the conjunction of a different
aspect of the skin barrier and vascular response and to a heightened neurosensory input, all
related to a genetic component (26–29).
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
9

=== Page 27 ===
BIOPHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SKIN
As the skin constitutes the external cover of the whole human body, its role has been reduced
since a long time to play a protective part against external aggressions.
The intense multidisciplinary exploration of the skin carried out during the past 30 years
progressively enabled to better determine the specific function of its components, the nature
and importance of the exchanges with the surrounding organs, and finally, the vital function
that the skin exerts on the organism, in addition to its main part in natural defense.
These progressive discoveries show that the skin’s functionality and immunity must not
be separated anymore and lead to the concept of a real neuro-immuno-cutaneous endocrine
system—the NICS (30).
As a living organism, the skin is in constant renewal and undergoes at the same time a
progressive aging with a parallel decrease in its functionality; moreover, today it still remains
difficult to distinguish what depends on natural evolution from what is under external control,
especially concerning the actinic one.
At external level, the renewal leads to a progressive change of the skin’s surface state, a
perceptible sign of the changes of both physiological functions and biophysical properties.
To measure the effects of aging and possibly to prevent its happening, it is important to
identify analytical parameters, as realistically as possible, which correspond to the population
concerned. It is particularly true for the analysis of biophysical data.
Beyond the interindividual variations or those that can result from the methodological
approach or from the material of measurement used, many authors have tried to identify the
influence of the race, sex, and age of the populations observed and even the anatomical site on
which the observations are made by the results obtained. The results of these investigations are
sometimes contradictory, but from now on, they enable us to emphasize some tendencies to be
taken into consideration when conducting studies on the human being.
The good previous knowledge of these differences is notably essential to know the
efficacy, acceptability, and even tolerance of products applied topically such as cosmetics or
dermatological products.
Their impact shall completely differ according to the market they are intended to, not
necessarily for being inefficient, but only for not being directly suitable for the targeted
population; not necessarily for questions of habit and mode, but mainly because they do not
correspond to the potential consumers’ ethnological specificities.
This part will give a brief reminder of the incidence of race, age, sex, and exposure site on
the most commonly explored biophysical characteristics of the skin.
Incidence of Race
It is useless to talk about the interracial morphological differences. They are obvious and never
gives rise to confusion at the very risk to complicate the problem of ethnical integrations.
At macroscopical level, Caucasian, Hispanic, Asian, and African skins are very different
at first sight as their color is enough to give them a well-distinct appearance.
This difference disappears at microscopical level as all the types of skin have the same
qualitative structure. However, this similarity is lower at quantitative level. So, for example,
the size and cytoplasmic dispersion of melanosomes are completely different for black and
Caucasian skins (31–33), because they correspond to different needs of photoprotection (34).
In fact, important functional differences exist between races and correspond to their
necessary adaptation to the environment they are meant to live in. There are also several
consequences regarding the repairing between ethnic skins (35).
So, whereas the mean thickness of the horny layer is similar between the different races
(36,37), the number of cell layers in the stratum corneum of the black skin is higher than that
noted in Caucasian or Asian skins. Black skins therefore have a more compact stratum
corneum with a greater cohesion between cells that makes them difficult to remove (38).
However, the surface of corneocytes is identical for all the types of skin (39). In apparent
contradiction to this greater cell cohesion, it is advisable to emphasize that the spontaneous
surface desquamation is significantly more important in blacks than in Caucasians or in
Asians (39).
These differences must be taken into account notably when the capacity of the products
for acting on cell renewal or for reducing skin drying is studied.
10
Couturaud

=== Page 28 ===
Interracial differences also exist concerning the melanocytic system. Even if each type of
skin basically has the same number of melanocytes per unit of surface, there is no similarity
concerning their structure (31) and their functionality (38). Whereas the melanosomes are small
and concentrated in the keratinocytes to be then degraded in the superficial layers of the
epidermis of Caucasian skins, they are much bigger, widely scattered in all the layers of the
keratinocytes and are not degraded when they arrive in the horny layer of black skins, giving
them a characteristic color (40). Colorimetric and spectrophotometric studies have shown that
the interindividual and intersexual differences of skin coloration in the different races are
mainly related to the blood concentration in hemoglobin for the Caucasian subject, both to the
hemoglobin and melatonic pigment content in the Asian subject, and only to the concentration
in melanin in the black subject (41).
Racial differences concerning the functionality of the epidermal appendices also exist.
Contrary to a firmly fixed notion, the number of sweat glands is not different between the
racial types, whatever the geographical site, as the variations depend more on exogenous than
on genetic factors (42,43). Today, nothing explains the different interracial smells, probably
depending on bacteria (38).
It even never has been possible to demonstrate a possible racial incidence on sebaceous
secretion as some authors report a more important activity for black skins (44,45), whereas
others report no substantial difference in sebaceous production between races in their
comparative studies (46). A recent study showed a more important sebaceous production on
the back in the white than in the black skin (47).
Thorough studies have explained the interracial differences in the hair shape (48,49) and
in pilosity, but did not manage to objectivate the differences between their chemical
components (50).
The advancement of knowledge enables today to retain the assumption that the genetic
factors and the intrinsic differences between ethnical groups actually have less importance
than their capacity for adaptation to the environment they live in. Many recent publications
reinforce this concept (51–53).
This different adaptation according to the races can have significant repercussions
according to the field investigated.
Skin Relief
Wrinkles result from distinct structural changes occurring in specific parts of the dermis and
the subcutaneous tissue. They are part of the skin’s aging process, which combines both
intrinsic and extrinsic components (54–56).
There is little information concerning the possible racial differences as the intra-ethnical
variations according to the age and possibly the site seem to have a much more important
impact on the variability of the measurements. However, among people of same age, it has
been shown that the number of wrinkles is the highest in Caucasians, followed at a same level
by the Hispanic and black people, the smallest number of wrinkles is observed in Asian
subjects (57). A comparative analysis of the number of wrinkles on 10 anatomical sites of
Caucasian and black subjects of same ages shows that actually the difference only concerns the
peri-auricular area (58).
Color
The interracial difference is obvious and mainly depends on the content, size, and distribution
of the melanosomes (59,60). As said, the number of melanocytes per unit of surface is the same
for all the races but their structure is different (33,61,62). The color of black skin is mainly
related to the particular migration of the melanosomes that invade all the epidermal layers and
reach the horny layer without undergoing degradation, a process that is completely different
from what happens in the skin of Caucasians (34,63).
Pigmentation favors a better protection against sun radiations and therefore actinic
aging. This can explain why, from this point of view, aging is quicker for the Asian skin (60).
The racial differences in constitutive pigmentation are also directly related to the incidence of
pigmentation disorders (64), the black skin being much more exposed to hyper-chromatic
spots that appear under the effect of external aggressors, or to hypo-chromatic spots for lack of
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
11

=== Page 29 ===
sun exposure (63,65,66). An order of increasing sensitivity to these alterations of pigmentation
has been established, classifying the black skin as the most exposed, followed by the white skin
sensitive to hyperpigmentation spots, then to a lesser degree Hispanic and Asian skins
(57,60,67).
Because of the difference between the carnations of the different ethnic groups, it was not
possible to have a similar classification for all of them. If it remained possible to define in a
similar way three types of complexion for Caucasians, African Americans, and Hispanic
Americans (dark, medium, light), only the Japanese skin had to be identified according to a
pink-ocher-beige color scale (67).
Concerning skin brightness measured from the parameter L* of the CIE L*a*b* system,
the best improvement of skin brightness after sun exposure is noted in Caucasians, followed in
decreasing order by the Asian skin, the Hispanic skin, and the black skin that mainly remains
dull. Except the black skin that has a lower index of brightness, all the other types of skin have
a similar index in absence of sun exposure (57).
pH
According to some authors, no interracial difference is observed concerning skin pH (57).
Others report a slightly higher pH for the Caucasian, in comparison with the black race (68–70).
These variations rather depend on the age of the population examined as the interracial
deviations are mainly noted in people aged between 30 and 50 years. The apparent
contradiction in the black skin could be explained by a higher cohesion of the keratinocytes in
the stratum corneum associated with specific mechanisms in its formation and renewal (71).
Electrical Conduction
The measurement of electrical conductance on the skin superficial layers enabled to show that
it is the highest for the black skin, lesser for the Hispanic and Asian skin, and the lowest for the
Caucasian skin (47,68,69,72–74). This electrical resistance is reported to be twice as high in
black as in white skins (69).
Another study (58) seems to demonstrate that on the contrary there would be no
difference between the electrical conduction of the skins of Caucasian subjects and of white
subjects. It enables to conclude that the racial criterion is not the only parameter to be taken
into account in the study of the skin’s electrical conductivity. So, the measurement of
capacitance on different skin sites enables to show contradictory interracial differences in the
same study (58).
It is worth noting that the black skin shows a higher epidermal water content, although
no change of the TEWL is observed. This particularity is justified by the greater cell cohesion of
the stratum corneum, previously evoked for this ethnical group (75).
Trans-Epidermal Water Loss
Many experimental results show no interracial difference concerning the basal level of TEWL
(47,72,76). More advanced studies enabled to establish that these global results were only
giving an apparent response as the TEWL of the subjects of black race is actually significantly
higher than that notably of Caucasian subjects, this difference being made up for in vivo by a
lesser vasodilatation of the black skin under the effect of external aggressors.
This demonstration initially carried out in vitro (77) has been confirmed in vivo later on
(47) by using substances able to neutralize the microcirculation locally.
The interracial variation could be related to the skin content in creaminess, the TEWL
being inversely proportional to their concentration (78).
Interracial differences in skin permeability and barrier effect have been demonstrated
under the effect of vasodilative agents (79) that show under the same experimental conditions
a lower TEWL in subjects of Caucasian race than in those of Asian and black races, which are
comparable with each other. When the aggression is a stripping, it has been shown that the
return to normal depends more on the phototype of the skin than on the race, the darkest skins
having a quicker recovery (80).
12
Couturaud

=== Page 30 ===
Biomechanical Properties
Measurements of the immediate extensibility (Ue), viscoelastic deformation (Uv), and capacity
for immediate recovery (Ur) of the skin of the forearms of subjects of Asian, Caucasian, and
black races to a deformation created by the twistometer have shown significant interracial
variations particularly between Caucasian and black skin, which go in one or the other
direction, depending on whether the measurements are performed on sites protected from sun
or not (72): For the three races, the extensibility is lower when the skin is used to sunshine in
comparison with what it is on a nonexposed site, this difference being clearly more marked for
the Caucasian skin (arbitrary values ranging from 34  3 to 40  3 for the black skin and from
49  2 to 28  2 for the Caucasian skin, respectively).
The variations in viscoelastic responses are not significant between protected site and
exposed site for the black subjects but are significant for the Caucasians and Hispanics even if
no interracial difference is noted.
Black skin has the same capacity for recovery on both sides of the forearm, whereas there
are significant differences between the two sites to the detriment of exposed areas for the
Hispanic and Caucasian skins.
The capacity for recovery of the black skin is higher than that of the Caucasian skin.
The calculation of the module of elasticity
1
extensibility  skin thickness


that takes into
account the incidence of skin thickness on the site of measurement showed significant
differences between the three races to the advantage of the black skin, whereas the deviation
between exposed site and protected site was only significant for the white race (72).
The elasticity index, measured by the ratio of recovery to extensibility enabled to show
no appreciable difference between races. These results were confirmed by other authors using
other sites and other equipments (68). The best elasticity of the black skin in comparison with
the white skin would result from its greater content in elastic fibers per unit of surface (81).
Seborrheic Production
Sebaceous secretion would be globally more important on the black skins, followed by the
white skins, by the Hispanic skins, and to a lesser extent by the Asian skins (36,44). This
variation is partly questioned by other authors who have found no substantial difference in
sebaceous production between Caucasian subjects and black subjects (45). Here again, the
anatomical site taken into account seems to be deciding. The black skin has a higher lipidic
content than that of the other races (82). Concerning this point, a seasonal variation is noted,
the black skin being more lipidic in the summer than in the winter, notably on face, apparent
paradox of a skin both dry and shiny, result of the superposition of a constitutional xerosis on a
protective film of surface, made up of a mixing of sweat and sebum (83).
Actinic Aging
The analysis of the penetration of light into the skin and of the effects it induces was reported
by many authors (84–87) who particularly took into account the behavioral difference between
the Caucasian skin and the black skin. In spite of structural differences in the stratum corneum,
the total reflectance of light at its level is located between 4% and 7% for the Caucasian and the
black people (84). On the contrary, there is a significant difference in the light transmission
through the epidermis of the Caucasian skin especially at wavelengths corresponding to the
ultra violet (UV) radiations, which results in a considerable decrease in the natural capacity for
actinic protection of this ethnic group. This transmission is less important in the subjects with
the Hispanic skin (87). Similar differences were noted with UVA.
On the whole sun spectrum, it results in a natural capacity for photoprotection of the
Caucasian skin three to four times as low as the black skin (88,89). This difference is directly
related to the distribution of melanosomes in all the epidermal layers of the black skin (90).
The physiological and morphological impact of aging may affect the ethnic populations
in different ways. As an example, comparative studies have shown that furrows appear earlier
in French than Japanese women even if grade severity is found higher in elderly Japanese
women. On the contrary, visual features related to the skin pigmentation appear earlier and in
a more accurate way in Japanese women (91,92).
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
13

=== Page 31 ===
The examination of the available data concerning racial variations enables to conclude
that these differences affect a reduced number of parameters, that the variations noted have a
limited incidence, and that the results published are often contradictory. As a consequence, the
interracial studies on the biophysical properties of the skin have to be tackled cautiously as the
deviations observed actually depend on several factors that can act in a synergic or
antagonistic way. Therefore, each experimental result will have to be confirmed. In addition,
the dispersion of the results obtained in this type of study must incite the experimenter to
establish study protocols that involve an enlarged number of subjects correctly selected to
avoid the fact that the variability of individual responses hides the reality of intergroup
differences.
Incidence of Sex
Although the influence of sex on the results of biophysical measurements is often quoted in
bibliography, little precise information is supplied, maybe because this criterion actually has
little real influence on the results.
However, there are morphological differences in the skin according to the sexes. In fact,
the skin thickness is greater in men on most of the sites usually used for biophysical
measurements (90,93,94), whereas for women, the skin is thicker at dermal level (95).
Other authors reported no significant differences for the forearms (96–98). Observations
made on male and female Asian subjects enabled to show no difference between sexes
concerning the number of layers of coenocytes (99). The skin thickness would reduce more
quickly with aging in women than in men (100).
Skin Relief
To our knowledge, no publication brings relevant data concerning the influence of sex on the
state and evolution of the skin relief.
The friction coefficient is also independent of sex (101).
Color
As already said, colorimetric and spectrometric studies have shown that pigmentation is more
important in men than in women (41). A study carried out with a colorimeter on a Caucasian
population showed that the parameter a* is generally the highest but that actually there is an
interaction between sex and age for each of the parameters L*, a*, and b* (102).
pH
Measurements performed on different skin sites confirmed the absence of any influence of sex
on the skin pH (103).
Electrical Conduction
A great number of investigators have dealt with the electrical conduction to characterize the
hydration level of the superficial layers of the skin, as it is a deciding factor in the study of the
neurosis or of the functionality of cosmetic products.
Several research teams have tried to determine the influence of the sex on the variability
of the results observed. Different parameters have been explored, some directly representative
of the skin’s electrical conductivity such as the capacitance and impedance and the others
representative of the opposite effect, i.e., the resistivity to conduction, such as the measurement
of resistance.
No difference between sexes was shown concerning the conductance (101) and
impedance (58). The more controversial publications concern the capacitance as some
experimenters report no difference between sexes (104), whereas others, on the contrary, report
a more important resistance to conduction in women than in men, on the basis of
measurements performed on several anatomical sites (96).
Trans-Epidermal Water Loss
Studies conducted by different authors on the TEWL have shown no variation between sexes
(101,105,106). Other researchers have reported a more important water loss in men than in
14
Couturaud

=== Page 32 ===
women (96,107); one of them in a study performed on Asians has related this difference to a
lower basal metabolism in women (108).
Biomechanical Properties
The incidence of the sexes on the measurements of the biomechanical properties of the skin
depends on the parameters used. Its dispensability is reported to be higher in women,
independently of the sites chosen (109). Noncomparative measurements between sites have
shown, on the forehead of women, an initial skin tension higher than that of men. This elastic
retraction is also reported to be relatively more important on the leg in women. The
nonelasticity index is relatively more important in women than in men, but the absolute values
of this index are clearly different according to the sites observed (90).
Finally, these authors report that there is no difference between sexes, whatever the sites
concerning the Young’s module (90) and the hysteretic curve (109) for values that, in absolute,
considerably differ between sites (110,111).
Seborrhea Production
The literature reports little relevant information on the incidence of sexes on sebum
production. The rare publications mention a significant difference as men generally have, on
the various sites studied, a higher sebum rate than women (96). On the other hand, the extent
of this variation would be low compared with the incidence of race (44). The production of
sebum would decrease with age, more particularly in women (62).
Incidence of Age
Because of the continuous aging of the skin and its incidence on its structure and functionality,
the age of the subjects included in a study is often the main element to obtain relevant results.
As we will consider in this chapter, age has a direct impact on the evolution of most of the
biophysical parameters of the skin.
Skin Relief
Many publications have shown the incidence of aging on the increase in its roughness, the
evolution of the microdepressionary network of the skin (110), and the development of
wrinkles whatever the ethnic group considered (57).
To simplify, roughness can be considered as submitted to external and internal
influences such as the climatic environment, the sun exposure, and the effect of cosmetic
products but also the water content of the skin’s superficial layers (112–115). The destructuring
of the skin micro-relief as the appearance of lines and then of wrinkles result from a deeper
change of the proper skin structure, a characteristic that progressively becomes irreversible
even if its term can be reduced by palliative care (55).
Many methods have been proposed to measure as accurately as possible the levels of
skin roughness, its microdepressionary network, or its different wrinkles.
These methods, most of the time instrumental, resort to the use of microsensors, image
analyzers, and photometric or echographic analyzers able to supply a very great number of
parameters among which only a few have real relevance.
Aside from these methodologies, now on mostly traditional, there are new develop-
ments, among which the frictional and acoustic measurements, which allow a more precise
information. As an example, it has been demonstrated that a significant increase of the sound
level between children and adult skins is indicative of their different smoothness (116).
Independently of the methodologies used, some facts have been established: The length
of the microdepressionary network decreases with age (110), and the depth of the folds grows
hollow as the first wrinkles develop (58). A systematic echographic analysis of wrinkles
enabled to establish a scale of values per ethnic group, according to the age and to the site
observed (117); the best correlation has been established for the number of wrinkles of the
periocular area (118).
All the bibliographical data show that the evolution of the microdepressionnary network
is particularly sensitive beyond the age of 40 years as the main lines start to grow hollow
progressively (119). The lines of secondary orientation progressively disappear between the
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
15

=== Page 33 ===
age of 50 and 80 years, and we observe monodirectional lines orientated in the direction of the
skin deformation and the multiplication of great spaces whose folds are not visible
microscopically (110,114).
Color
For all the races, there is a decrease in the hyperpigmentation spots related to the age of the
subjects (57). The colorimetric examination enables to note a decrease in brightness of the skin in
the Japanese and in the Caucasians (120) as measured by the parameter L* of the CIE L*a*b*
system (102). Concurrently, there is no significant change of the colorimetric parameters a* and b*
and of the parameter C, corresponding to the skin’s saturation (121).
In practice, these variations can differ according to the site observed and the level of sun
exposure (57).
In total, we can deduce from the bibliographical data that there is a decrease in the
brightness of the skin with aging but also that this variation depends on the site where the
measurement is performed.
pH
There are few available data on the subject. To our knowledge, the only explorations published
underline the absence of any variation in the skin pH measured on several sites according to
the age of the subjects taking part in the study (57).
Electrical Conduction
The conductance generally increases with the age in all the ethnic groups (57). The capacitance
measured comparatively in young and old subjects appears significantly lower in old subjects
(58). In practice, this evolution is not linear as the capacitance actually increases with age until
50 years and decreases later on (122).
However, these observations must be considered cautiously because a more detailed
analysis that takes into account the measurements on several anatomical areas shows that
actually the value of conductance and capacitance is also closely related to the measurement
site (96,101,104,123).
The electrical impedance measured with the spectrometer also varies according to age as
the values of the indexes of magnitude (MIX), real part (RIX), and imaginary part (IMIX)
increase with age, whereas the index of phase (PIX) evolves in the opposite direction (107). The
indexes MIX and IMIX are considered as the most representative of aging.
Trans-Epidermal Water Loss
The relation between TEWL and age is most often questioned as some authors conclude that
there is no relation between these two parameters (124,125), whereas others found that this
relation does exist but is very slight (118) or that this correlation varies according to the
anatomical sites where the measurements are performed. An increase in the TEWL on the
forehead is described (96,122). On the whole, the authors rather report a decrease in the TEWL
according to age on most of the other sites examined (96,101,125).
These contradictory data incite to act with the maximum attention to measure this
parameter, taking care to have an objective reference at disposal for each measurement.
Any correlation to the measurements of capacitance is strongly questioned (126–128).
Biomechanical Properties
Globally, a decrease in skin elasticity with age has been reported (110,129). This is the same for
tonicity and extensibility.
Actinic Aging
In the adult person, epidermal proliferation rate decreases with age. It can be 10 times higher
in younger (second decade) than in older (seventh decade) individuals, and for a given age, the
decrease was demonstrated to be 10 times faster in sun-exposed areas than in unexposed ones.
These constant reductions seem to be independent of the ethnic origin and season (130).
16
Couturaud

=== Page 34 ===
Incidence of Site
As previously seen, the racial criteria, age, and sex are not enough to define the skin’s response
to an aggression or to a possible restructuring effect. In fact, important variations exist in the
subject considered separately according to the sites on which the measurements are
performed, these variations being sufficiently important to invalidate the experimental results.
Without trying to be exhaustive, this last part of the analysis supplies many concrete
examples meant to incite the experimenters to choose accurately the site of measurement,
according to its specificity, to the exploration that must be undertaken and also according to
the reference, which is taken into account for the appreciation of the significance of the effects
observed. The spontaneous changes of the skin’s state over time according to intercurrent
factors that depend on physiological and hormonal variations and on its proper aging
therefore imply that their incidence is systematically taken into account, such an approach can
only be performed case by case.
The skin’s thickness is not the same between anatomical sites as established in the
publications of many authors through numbered data and different instrumental measure-
ments. So, for example, the skin’s thickness measured in the subject of Caucasian race is less on
the forearm than on the forehead, of the order of 0.9 and 1.7 mm, respectively (90). These
values are slightly higher than those described by other authors (93,131–133) but can be taken
into account as the approach was performed through a more elaborated technique based on
high-resolution scanning (90,100). In addition to the differences that exist between anatomical
sites, there are great variations for the same area. This is the case, for example, between
different areas of face (96), between the dorsal and volar area of the forearm (72), and between
different locations of the forearm (134).
Measurements performed with a scanner on 22 anatomical sites of young male and
female Caucasians enabled to note that the skin is all the more echogenic since it is thinner and
that at acoustic level the response of the reticular dermis is denser than that of the papillary
dermis. This acoustic density, also inversely proportional to the skin’s thickness, is
consequently variable according to the thickness of the anatomical sites measured (95).
It must be underlined that in spite of differences in the absolute values from site to site,
the evolution of the response of a given site can be predictive for other sites in the same
person. This is of most interest in clinical research. As an example, the volar forearm is
considered as representative of the face for measuring the skin’s hydration and biomechanical
properties (135).
Skin Relief
As it has already been said, at basal state, skin relief is directly representative of the state of
anisotropy of the local tensions, and the structural deformations or changes it undergoes are
directly dependent on the constraints underwent (mechanical constraints and aging but also
external aggressions) (136). This relief is therefore necessarily specific according to the sites
observed as it can be shown by a simple visual examination of the structure and topography of
the skin at different levels, for example, face, neck, limbs, and hands (137). Beyond the structural
differences between anatomical sites, there are also differences in levels of roughness (58,138–140).
Color
There are important natural variations in the skin color between anatomical sites in absence of
the additional effects on melanogenesis induced by sun exposure. Colorimetric measurements
performed according to the CIE L*a*b* system on 18 different sites enabled to note in the subjects
of Caucasian race of prototypes I and II a more important variation in the parameter a*, directly
connected to the redness of the skin (141).
A comparative analysis between cheeks, forehead, and volar side of the forearm, usually
exposed to the sun, showed that the forearm is lighter than the sites on face, the values of the
parameters a* and b* being significantly highest for the forehead (119,138). Important
variations between the measurements performed on different site of a same anatomical area
are also reported. Thus, for example, the variation in the values a* and b* is between distal and
proximal forearm (141) and high and low part of the back (102). For a given race, the parameter
L* seems to be slightly influenced by the anatomical site where the measurement is performed
(119,138,141).
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
17

=== Page 35 ===
The location of the site of measurement is therefore very important during a repeated
colorimetric analysis of the skin. The interference that results from the variation in pigmen-
tation according to its exposure to the sun’s UV radiations is very important and can also
induce higher deviations than those existing between anatomical locations.
All the experimental studies that resort to colorimetric measurements have to take the
incidence of this interference into account on the results recorded.
pH
To our knowledge, few authors took an interest in the incidence of the site of measurement on
the value of the skin pH, maybe only because the buffer function of the skin does not enable to
note, for the same race, great variations between anatomical sites. However, in a work
conducted on 574 Caucasian males and females of different ages, repeated measurements
showed that the pH of cheek (4, 2–6, 0) would be significantly higher than that of forehead
(4, 0–5, 6), which confirms the previous observations (103,142). Another worker reports no
difference between repeated measurements of the pH on the cheek, arm, and calf (57).
Electrical Conduction
A very great number of research undertaken to have a better knowledge of the state of the skin
hydration, notably through the study of its electrical conduction, quickly enabled to establish
that it is not homogeneous on the whole human body. Most of the data refer to the anatomical
sites most sensitive to skin drying, which are also the most exposed to the external aggressions
and particularly to the sun.
The stability of the experimental results obtained depends for a great part on the choice
of the methodology implemented. According to some experimenters, the equipment that
measures the capacitance actually seems to supply the most stable data (58,96,104,138).
All the authors report significant differences between anatomical areas and generally
consider the forehead as the site where capacitance (57,58,96,101,104) and impedance (107) are
the highest, the different sites of the face seem to give fairly similar results (28,96,138).
Here again, some researchers have shown that the different sites of the same anatomical
area, for example, the dorsal and volar sides of the forearm, which correspond to different
morphologies, have unequal conduction. However, these differences also occur according to
the race considered (72).
Here again, the location of the site of measurement is very important as it ensures that
the analysis in the variation of electrical conduction over time remains relevant.
Trans-Epidermal Water Loss
The variation in TEWL according to the anatomical sites explored has been broadly
demonstrated. On the whole, the comparative studies have shown a maximal water
perspiration on palms followed by the sole of the foot, the back of the hand, and then by
the different sites of face (28,96,101,107,138,143–145). However, there seems to be no significant
deviation between proximal and distal sites of the same geographical area (72,134). On the
other hand, measurements performed comparatively on five sites taken symmetrically on both
the forearms of 16 subjects of Caucasian race showed the existence of significant deviations
between symmetrical sites that do not enable to consider the contralateral site as equivalent,
concerning its TEWL. This fact questions a traditional experimental concept and justifies the
randomization of sites to take this dominance into account, related to the laterality of the
subjects that take part in a study (146).
Biomechanical Properties
The variability of the skin’s thickness and of its structure according to the geographical
locations considered clearly has an influence on the biomechanical properties. The value of the
Young’s module is consequently significantly higher on the forehead that on the forearm.
Conversely, the initial tension of the skin is higher on the forearm (90). The extensibility
measured on 22 skin sites is the most important on the forehead and the lowest important on
the foot. This is the same for hysteresis (109).
18
Couturaud

=== Page 36 ===
Tonicity, plasticity, and elasticity decrease with the age in different proportions between
sites, the measurements performed over time on the forearms, giving the most stable results
whatever the dimension of the probes used in an experimental model by extensometry (110).
The variations in extensibility, elastic recovery, elasticity, and viscoelasticity between
sites of the same geographical area do not systematically vary in the same way according to the
race considered. This is the case concerning the variations noted after measurements
performed on the dorsal and volar sides of the forearms of Caucasian, Hispanic, and black
subjects (72).
Seborrheic Production
The global sebum rate also varies according to the sites as they do not have the same
concentration in active sebaceous glands. It is the most important on the forehead, chin area,
and upper part of the plexus and back (147).
Actually there is no divergence concerning the sebum content of the different anatomical
sites according to the authors who took an interest in this subject (57,96,138,148).
For many researchers, this inter-site difference would correspond to different quantities
of lipids (148), which have, according to the authors, equivalent (97) or different (149)
compositions. This apparent disagreement could be actually explained by the fact that the
studies are carried out at different periods of the year as the seasonality influences the contents
in lipidic components particularly in Caucasians (150).
CONCLUSION
The resort to biophysical methods to quantify the instantaneous state of the skin or its
evolution under the effect of the aggressions of the environment or inversely under the effect
of products able to prevent its evolution is justified only when the methodologies implemented
enable to take into account its extraordinary structural and functional diversity.
In fact, to ensure its protective, moisturizing, thermoregulatory, and nutritional parts as
well as its keratogenic, melanogenic, and reserve functions that are specific to the different
layers it is made up of, the skin has, beyond the global specificities related to the race, age, and
sex of the subjects, functional specificities that do not allow a global analysis.
The organ in charge of the main part of the relation of the whole organism with its
external environment, the skin, has a permanent capacity for adaptability to interfere with the
experimental data. Its incidence therefore has to be systematically taken into account.
REFERENCES
1. Flynn TC, Petros J, Clark JE, et al. Dry skin and moisturizers. Clin Dermatol 2001; 19(4):387–392.
2. Agache P, Vachon D. Fonction de protection me´canique (Function of mechanical protection). In:
Agache P, ed. Physiologie de la peau et explorations fonctionnelles cutane´es, Inter EM, Cachan F,
2000; 408–422.
3. Aron-Brunetie`re R. Les the´rapeutiques endocrinologiques du vieillissement cutane´ (Endocrinologic
therapeutics of skin ageing). Med Esth Chir Dermatol 1981; 18(32):185–188.
4. Pierard GE. What do you mean by dry skin? Dermatologica 1989; 179:1–2.
5. Pierard GE. Caracte´risation des peaux se`ches : la biome´trologie comple`te la clinique (Character-
isation of dry skins: biometrology completes clinic). Cosmetology 1997; 14:48–51.
6. Pierard GE. EEMCO Guidance for the assessment of dry skin (xerosis) and ichtyosis: evaluation by
stratum corneum stripping. Skin Res Technol 1996; 2:3–11.
7. Horii I, Akiu S, Okasaki K, et al. Biochemical and histological studies on the stratum corneum of
hyperkeratotic epidermis. J Soc Cosmet Chem Jpn 1980; 14:174–178.
8. Koyama J, Kawasaki K, Horii I, et al. Relation between dry skin and water soluble components in the
stratum corneum. J Soc Cosmet Chem Jpn 1983; 16:119–124.
9. Koyama J, Kawasaki K, Horii I, et al. Free amino acids of stratum corneum as a biochemical marker
to evaluate dry skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1984; 35:183–195.
10. Akasaki S, Minematsu Y, Yoshizuka N, et al. The role of intercellular lipids in the water-holding
properties of the stratum corneum—Recovery effect on experimentally induced dry skin. Nippon
Hifuka Gakkai Zasshi 1988; 98:41–51.
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
19

=== Page 37 ===
11. Denda M, Hori J, Koyama J, et al. Stratum corneum sphingolipids and free amino acids in
experimentally induced scaly skin. Arch Dermatol Res 1992; 284:363–367.
12. Ozawa T, Nishiyama S, Horii I, et al. Humectants and their effects on the moisturization of skin.
Hifu 1985; 27:276–288.
13. Pierard-Franchimont C, Pierard GE. Ke´ratinisation, xe´rose et peau se`che In: Robert P, ed.,
Dermatopharmacologie clinique, Maloine 1985; 215–221.
14. Kitamura K, Ito A, Yamada K, et al. Research on the mechanism by which dry skin occurs and the
development of an effective compound for its treatment. J Cosmet Chem Jpn 1995; 29:133–145.
15. Hennings H, Michael D, Cheng C, et al. Calcium regulation of growth and differentiation of mouse
epidermal cells in culture. Cell 1980; 19:245–254.
16. Kitamura K. Potential medication for skin care new effective compound for dry skin. In: Tagami H,
Parrish JA, Ozawa T, eds. Skin Interface of a Living System. International Congress series 1159,
Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica, Elsevier, 1998.
17. Fulmer AW, Kramer GJ. Stratum corneum lipid abnormalities in surfactant-induced dry scaly skin.
J Inv Dermatol 1986; 86:598–602.
18. Schmidt JB, Hobisch G, Lindmaier A. Epidermal moisture and skin surface lipids throughout life as
parameters for cosmetic care. J Appl Cosmetol 1990; 8:17–22.
19. Tabata N, Tagami H, Kligman AM. A twenty-four-hour occlusive exposure to 1% sodium lauryl
sulfate induces a unique histopathologic inflammatory response in the xerotic skin of atopic
dermatitis patients. Acta Derm Venereol 1998; 78:244–247.
20. Pierard GE. Rate and topography of follicular heterogeneity of sebum secretion. Dermatologica 1987;
15:280–283.
21. Mavon A. Energie libre de surface de la peau humaine in vivo: une nouvelle approche de la
se´borrhe´e (Free surface energy of human skin in vivo: a new approach of seborrhoea). The`se
Sciences de la Vie et de la Sante´ N8 259706 F-Besanc¸on. 1997.
22. Fisher LB. Exploring the relationship between facial sebum level and moisture content. Int
J Cosmetol Sc 1998; 49:53.
23. Rizer RL. Oily skin: claim support strategies. In: Elsner P, Merk HF, Maibach HI, eds. Cosmetics.
Controlled Efficacy Studies and Regulation, Springer, 1999; 81–91.
24. Pochi PE, Strauss JS. Endocrinologic control of the development and activity of the human sebaceous
gland. J Invest Dermatol 1974; 62:191.
25. Clarys P, Barrel A. Quantitative evaluation of skin lipids. Clin Dermat 1995; 13:307–321.
26. Clarys P, Manou I, Barel A. Relationship between anatomical skin and response to halcininide and
methyl nicotinate studied by bioengineering techniques. Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:161–168.
27. Henry F, Goffin V, Maibach HI, et al. Regional differences in stratum corneum reactivity to
surfactants. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37:271–275.
28. Distante F, Rigano L, Sirigu S, et al. Intra- and inter-individual differences in facial skin functional
properties: influence of site and “skin sensitivity” for bioengineering studies, 21st IFSCC
International congress, Berlin, 2000.
29. Rawlings AV. Ethnic skin types: are there differences in skin structure and function. Int J Cosmetic
Science 2006; 28:79–93.
30. Kan C, Kimura S, Psychoneuroimmunological Benefits of Cosmetics Proceedings of the 18th IFSCC
Meeting I; Venice, 1994:769–784.
31. Fellner MJ, Chen AS, Mont M, et al. Patterns and intensity of autofluorescence and its relation to
melanin in human epidermis and hair. Int J Dermatol 1979; 18:722–730.
32. Kollias N, Sayre RM, Zeise L, et al. Photoprotection by melanin. J Photochem Photobiol B Biol 1991;
9:135–160.
33. Szabo´
G, Gerald AB, Pathak MA, et al. Racial differences in the fate of melanosomes in human
epidermis. Nature 1969; 222:1081–1082.
34. McDonald CJ. Structure and function of the skin. Are there differences between black and white
skin? Dermatol Clin 1988; 6:343–347.
35. Alexis FA. Special considerations in the treatment of ethnic skin. J Cosmetic Science 2006; 57(5):
407–408.
36. Weigand DA, Haygood C, Gaylor GR. Cell layers and density of Negro and Caucasian stratum
Corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1974; 62:563–568.
37. Thomson ML. Relative efficiency of pigment and horny layer thickness in protecting the skin of
Europeans and Africans against solar ultraviolet radiation. J Physiol 1955; 127:236–246.
38. La Ruche G, Cesarini JP. Histologie et physiologie de la peau noire (Histology and physiology of
black skin). Ann Dermatol Venereol 1992; 119:567–574.
39. Corcuff P, Lotte C, Rougier A, et al. Racial differences in corneocytes. A comparison between black,
white and oriental skin. Stockh Acta Derm Venereol 1991; 71:146–148.
40. Kelly AP. Keloids. Dermatol Clin 1988; 6:413–424.
20
Couturaud

=== Page 38 ===
41. Vasilevskii VK, Zherebtsov LD, Spichak SD, et al. Color and morphological features in people of
different racial groups. Engl Tr Bull Exp Biol Med 1988; 106:1501–1504.
42. Knip AS. Ethnic studies of sweat gland counts in physiological variation and its genetic basis.
Weiner JS, ed. New York: Halstead Press, 1977; 113–123.
43. McDonald CJ. Some thoughts on differences in black and white skin. Int J Dermatol 1976; 15:427–430.
44. Kligman AM, Shelley WB. An investigation of the biology of the human sebaceous gland. J Invest
Dermatol 1958; 30:99–125.
45. Pochi PE, Strauss JS. Sebaceous gland activity in black skin. Dermatol Clin 1988; 6:349–351.
46. Nicolaides N, Rothman S. Studies on the chemical composition of human hair fat. II. The overall
composition with regard to age, sex and race. J Invest Dermatol 1953; 21:9–14.
47. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Racial differences in sodium lauryl sulfate induced cutaneous irritation:
black and white. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 18:65–70.
48. Lindelo¨f B, Forslind B, Hedblad MA, et al. Human hair form. Morphology revealed by light an
scanning electron microscopy and computer aided three-dimensional reconstruction. Arch Dermatol
Res 1988; 124:1359–1363.
49. McLaurin CI. Cosmetics for blacks: a medical perspective. Cosmest Toil 1983; 98:47–53.
50. Rook A. Racial and other genetic variations in hair form. Br J Dermatol 1975; 92:559–560.
51. Andersen KE, Maibach HI. Black and white human skin differences. J Am Acad Dermatol 1979;
1:276–282.
52. Baker PT. Racial differences in heat tolerance. Am J Phys Anthropol 1958; 16:287–305.
53. Yousef MK, Dill DB, Vitez TS, et al. Thermoregulatory responses to desert heat: age, race and sex.
J Gerontol 1984; 39:406–414.
54. Pie´rard GE. The quandary of climacteric skin aging. Dermatology 1996; 193:273–274.
55. Quatresooz P, Thirion L, Pierard-Franchimont C. The riddle of genuine skin microrelief and
wrinkles. Int J Cosmetic Science 2006; 28:389–395.
56. Gniadecka M, Jemec GB. Quantitative evaluation of chronological ageing and photoageing in vivo:
studies on skin echogenicity and thickness. Br J Dermatol 1998; 139:815–821.
57. Hillebrand GG, Levine MJ, Miyamoto K. The age-dependent changes in skin condition in African
Americans, Asian Indians, Caucasians, East Asians and Latinos. IFSCC Magazine 2001; 4:259–266.
58. Manuskiatti W, Schwindt DA, Maibach HI. Influence of age, anatomic site and race on skin
roughness and scaliness. Dermatology 1998; 196:401–407.
59. Kollias N. The physical basis of skin color and its evaluation. Clinics in Derm 1995; 13:361–367.
60. Tschachler E, Morizot F. Ethnic differences in skin aging. In: Gilchrest BA, Krutmann J, eds. Skin
Aging 2006; Chapter 3:3–31.
61. Norle´n L, Nicander I, Rozell BL, et al. Inter- and intra-individual differences in human stratum
corneum lipid content related to physical parameters of skin barrier function in vivo. J Invest
Dermatol 1999; 112:72–77.
62. Tranggono RI, Purwoho H, Setiawan R. The studies of the values of sebum, moisture and pH of the
skin in Indonesians. J Appl Cosmetol 1990; 8:51–61.
63. Saurel V. Peaux noires et me´tisse´es: des besoins spe´cifiques (Black and crossed skins: specific needs).
Cosmetology 1997; 14:8–11.
64. Jimbow M, Jimbow K. Pigmentary disorders in oriental skin. Clinics and Dermatology 1989; 7:11–27.
65. Grimes PE, Stockton T. Pigmentary disorders in blacks. Dermatol Clin 1988; 6:271–281.
66. Halder RM, Grimes PE, McLaurin CI, et al. Incidence of common dermatoses in a predominantly
black dermatological practice. Cutis 1983; 32:388–390.
67. Caisey L, Grangeat F, Lemasson A, et al. Skin color and makeup stategies of women from different
ethnic groups. Int J Cosmetic Science 2006; 28:427–437.
68. Warrier AG, Kligman AM, Harper RA, et al. A comparison of black and white skin using non-
invasive methods. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1996; 47:229–240.
69. Johnson LC, Corah NL. Racial differences in skin resistance. Science 1963; 139:766–767.
70. Takahashi M, Watanabe H, Kumagai H, et al. Physiological and morphological changes in facial skin
with aging (II): a study on racial differences. J Soc Cosmet Chem Japan 1989; 23:22–30.
71. Berardesca E, Pirot F, Singh F, et al. Differences in stratum corneum pH gradient when comparing
white Caucasian and black African-American skin. Br J Dermatol 1998; 138:855–857.
72. Berardesca E, De Rigal J, Leveque JL, et al. In vivo biophysical characterization of skin physiological
differences in races. Dermatologica 1991; 182:89–93.
73. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Sodium lauryl sulfate induced cutaneous irritation. Comparison of white
and Hispanic subjects. Contact dermatitis 1988; 19:136–140.
74. Janes JC, Worland J, Stern JA. Skin potential and vasomotor responsiveness of black and white
children. Psychophysiology 1976; 13:523–527.
75. Rietschel RL. A method to evaluate skin moisturizers in vivo. J Invest Dermatol 1978; 70:152–155.
76. Wesley NO, Maibach HI. Racial differences in skin properties: can skin care be universal? Cosmetics
and Toiletries magazine 2003; 118(3):30–37.
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
21

=== Page 39 ===
77. Wilson D, Berardesca E, Maibach HI. In vitro transepidermal water loss: difference between black
and white human skin. Br J Dermatol 1988; 119:647–652.
78. Sugino K, Imokawa G, Maibach H. Ethic difference of stratum corneum lipid in relation to stratum
corneum function. J Invest Dermatol 1993; 100:597.
79. Kompaore F, Marty JP, Dupont CH. In vivo evaluation of the stratum corneum barrier function in
Blacks, Caucasians and Asians with two noninvasive methods. Skin Pharmacol 1993; 6:200–207.
80. Reed JT, Ghadially R, Elias PM. Effect of race, gender and skin type on epidermal permeability
barrier function. J Invest Dermatol 1994; 102:537.
81. Kligman AM. Unpublished observations, University of Pennsylvania, Department of Dermatology,
Phildelphia, 1994.
82. Rienertson RP, Wheatley VR. Studies on the chemical composition of human epidermal lipids.
J Invest Dermatol 1959; 32:49–59.
83. Montagna W, Carlisle K. The architecture of black and white skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991;
24:929–937.
84. Anderson R, Parrish J. The optics of human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 77:13–17.
85. Pathak MA, Fitzpatrick TB. The role of natural protective agents in human skin. In: Fitzpatrick TB,
Pathak MA, Harber RC, et al. eds. Sunlight and Man. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1974; 725–750.
86. Everett MA, Yeagers E, Sayre RM, et al. Penetration of epidermis by ultraviolet rays. Photochem
Photobiol 1966; 5:553.
87. Kaidbey KH, Poh Agin P, Sayre RM, et al. Photoprotection by melanin-a comparison of black and
Caucasian skin. Am Acad Dermatol 1979; 1:249.
88. Goh SH. The treatment of visible signs of senescence: the Asian experience. Br J Derm 1990; 122:
105–109.
89. Marks R. Aging and photo damage. In: Marks R, ed. Sun Damaged Skin. London: Dunitz M, 1992:
5–7.
90. Diridollou S, Black D, Lagarde M, et al. Sex- and site-dependent variations in the thickness and
mechanical properties of human skin in vivo. Int J Cosmet Sci 2000; 22:421–435.
91. Morizot F, Lopez S, Dheurle S, et al. Are visual features of skin aging in caucasians and Japanese
different? 23rd IFSCC International congress, 2004.
92. Tsukahara K, Fujimura T, Yoshida Y, et al. Comparison of age-related changes in wrinkling and
sagging of the skin in Caucasian females and in Japanese females. J Cosmet Sci 2004; 55:373–385.
93. Denda M, Takashi M. Measurement of facial skin thickness by ultrasound method. J Soc Chem Jpn
1990; 23:316–319.
94. Seidenari S, Pagoni A, Di Nardo A, et al. Echographic evaluation with image analysis of normal skin:
variations according to aeg and sex. Br J Dermatol 1994; 131:641–648.
95. Olsen LO, Takiwaki H, Serup J. High-frequency ultrasound characterization of normal skin. Skin
thickness and echographic density of 22 anatomical sites. Skin Res Technol 1995; 1:74–80.
96. Conti A, Schiavi ME, Seidenari S. Capacitance, transepidermal water loss and causal level of sebum
in healthy subjects in relation to site, sex and age. Int J Cosmet Sci 1995; 17:77–85.
97. Greene RS, Downing DT, Pochi PE, et al. Anatomical variation in the amount and composition of
human skin surface lipid. J Invest Dermatol 1970; 54:240–147.
98. Sugihara T, Ohura T, Homma K, et al. The extensibility in human skin: variation according to age
and site. Br J Plast Surg 1991; 44:418–422.
99. Ya-Xian Z, Suetake T, Tagami H. Number of cell layers in normal skin—relationship to the
anatomical location on the body, age, sex and physical parameters. Arch Dermatol Res 1999; 291:
555–559.
100. Lasagni C, Seidenari S. Echographic assessment of age-dependent variations of skin thickness. Skin
Res Technol 1995; 1:81–85.
101. Cua AB, Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Frictional properties of human skin: relation to age, sex and
anatomical region, stratum corneum hydration and transepidermal water loss. Br J Dermatol 1990;
123:473–479.
102. Fullerton A, Serup J. Site, gender and age variation in normal skin colour on the back and the
forearm: tri stimulus colorimetric measurements. Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:49–52.
103. Zlotogorski A. Distribution of skin surface pH on the forehead and cheek of adults. Arch Dermatol
Res 1987; 279:398–401.
104. Mussi A, Carducci M, D’Agosto G, et al. Influence of skin area, age and sex on corneometric
determinations. Skin Res Technol 1998; 4:83–87.
105. Lammintausta K, Maibach HI, Wilson D. Irritant reactivity and males and females. Contact
Dermatitis 1987; 14:276–280.
106. Tupker RA, Coenrads PJ, Pinnagoda J, et al. Baseline transepidermal water loss (TEWL) as a
prediction of susceptibility to sodium lauryl sulphate. Contact Dermatitis 1989; 20:265–269.
107. Nicander I, Nyre´n M, Emtestam L, et al. Baseline electrical impedance measurements at various skin
sites—related to age and sex. Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:252–258.
22
Couturaud

=== Page 40 ===
108. Gho CL, Chia SE. Skin irritability to sodium lauryl sulphate, as measured by skin water vapour loss,
by sex and race. Clin Exp Dermatol 1988; 13:16–19.
109. Malm M, Samman M, Serup J. In vivo skin elasticity of 22 anatomical sites—the vertical gradient of
skin extensibility and implications in gravitational aging. Skin Res Technol 1995; 1:61–67.
110. Couturaud V, Coutable J, Khaiat A. Skin biomechanical properties: in vivo evaluation of influence of
age and body site by a non-invasive method. Skin Res Technol 1995; 1:68–73.
111. Qu D, Masotti CJ, Seehra PG. Effect of age and gender on the viscoelastic properties of skin. J Cosmet Sc
2006; 28(2):197–198.
112. Corcuff P, Leveque JL. Skin surface replica image analysis of furrow and wrinkles. In: Serup J, Jemec
GBE, eds. Handbook of Non Invasive Methods and the Skin, Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995; 89–95.
113. Hoppe U, Sauermann G. Quantitative analysis of the skin’s surface by means of digital signal
processing. J Cosmet Chem 1985; 36:105–123.
114. Corcuff P, De Rigal J, Leveque JL. Skin relief and aging. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1983; 34:177–190.
115. Corcuff P, Franc¸ois AM, Leveque JL, et al. Microrelief changes in chronically sun-exposed human
skin. Photodermatology 1988; 5:92–95.
116. Flament F, Vargiolu R, Mavon A, et al. Acoustic and frictional measurements: a new device to assess
in vivo the skin “sweetness”—Applications to skin ageing. Ethnic hair and cosmetic treatments, 114–119.
117. Takema Y, Yorimoto Y, Kawai M. The relationship between age-related changes in the physical
properties and development of wrinkles in human facial skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1995; 46:163–173.
118. Takema Y, Tsukahara K, Fujimura T, et al. Age-related changes in the three-dimensional
morphological structure of human facial skin, Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:95–100.
119. Leveque JL, Corcuff P, De Rigal J, et al. In vivo studies of the evolution of physical properties of the
human skin with age. Int J Dermatol 1984; 5:322–329.
120. Le Fur I, Numagami K, Guinot C, et al. Skin Colour in Caucasian and Japanese Healthy Women:
Age-Related Difference Ranges according to Skin Site. Proceedings of the IFSCC (Poster). Berlin,
2000.
121. Le Fur I, Guinot C, Lopez S, et al. Couleur de la peau chez les femmes caucasiennes en fonction de
l’aˆge : recherche´ des valeurs de reference (Skin colour in Caucasian women according to age: search
for the reference values). In: Humbert P, Zahouani H, eds. Actualite´s en Inge´nie´rie Cutane´e 2001
1:189–196.
122. Le Fur I, Guinot C, Lopez S, et al. Age-Related Reference Ranges for Skin Biophysical Parameters in
Healthy Caucasian Women. Proceedings of the IFSCC (Poster). Berlin, 2000.
123. Saijo S, Hashimoto-Kumasaka K, Takahashi M, et al. Functional changes on the stratum corneum
associated with aging and photoaging. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1991; 42:379–383.
124. Hildebrandt D, Ziegler K, Wollina U. Electrical impedance and transepidermal water loss of healthy
human skin under different conditions. Skin Res Technol 1998; 4:130–134.
125. Rougier A, Lotte C, Corcuff P, et al. Relationship between skin permeability and corneocyte size
according to anatomic site, age, and sex in man. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1988; 39:15–26.
126. Lode´n M, Olsson H, Axe´ll T, et al. Friction, capacitance and transepidermal water loss (TEWL) in
dry atopic and normal skin. Br J Dermatol 1992; 126:137–141.
127. Tagami H. Impedance measurement for the evaluation of the hydration state of the skin surface. In:
Leveque JL, eds. Cutaneous investigation in health and disease. New York: Marcel Dekker: 1989;
79–112.
128. Triebskorn A, Gloor M, Greiner F. Comparative investigations on the water content of the stratum
corneum using different methods of measurement. Dermatologica 1983; 167:64–69.
129. Escoffier C, De Rigal J, Rochefort A, et al. Age-related mechanical properties of human skin: an
in vivo study. J Invest Dermatol 1989; 93:353–357.
130. Stamatas GN, Estanislao RB, Suero M, et al. Facial skin fluorescence as a marker of the skin’s response
to chronic environmental insults and its dependence on age. Br J Dermatol 2006; 154:125–132.
131. De Rigal J, Leveque JL. In vivo measurement of the stratum corneum elasticity. Bioeng Skin 1985;
1:13–23.
132. Hoffmann K, Dirschka TP, Stucker M, et al. Assessment of actinic skin damage by 20-MHz
sonography. Phodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 1994; 10:97–101.
133. Takema Y, Yorimoto Y, Kawai M, et al. Age-related changes in the elastic properties and thickness of
human facial skin. Br J Dermatol 1994; 131:641–648.
134. Rogiers V, Derde MP, Verleye G, et al. Standardized conditions needed for skin surface hydration
measurement. Cosmet Toilet 1990; 105:73–82.
135. Bazin R, Fanchon C. Equivalence of face and volar forearm for the testing of moisturizing and
firming effect of cosmetics in hydration and biomechanical studies. Int J Cosmet Sc 2006; 28:453–460.
136. Panisset F, Varchon D, Pirot F, et al. Evaluation du module de Young au stratum corneum in vivo
(Evaluation of the Young’s standard on the stratum corneum in vivo), Congre`s Annual Research
Dermat F-Nimes, 1993.
Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin in Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site
23

=== Page 41 ===
137. Mignot J, Zahouani H, Rondot D, et al. Morphological study of human skin topography. Int J Bioeng
Skin 1987; 3:177–196.
138. Le Fur I, Lopez S, Morizot F, et al. Comparison of cheek and forehead regions by bioengineering
methods in women with different self-reported “cosmetic skin types”. Skin Res Technol 1999;
5:182–188.
139. Kligman AM. The classification and treatment of wrinkles. In: Kligman AM, Takase Y, eds.
Cutaneous Aging, Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1985; 99–109.
140. El Gammal C, Kligman AM, El Gamma S. Anatomy of the skin surface. In: Wilhelm KP, Elsner P,
Berardesca E, et al., eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Skin Surface Imaging and Analysis, Boca Raton:
CRC Press, 1997; 3–19.
141. Ale SI, Laugier JPK, Maibach HI. Spacial variability of basal skin chromametry on the ventral
forearm of healthy volunteer. Arch Dermatol Res 1996; 288:774–777.
142. Dikstein S, Hartzshtark A, Bercovici P. The dependence of low pressure indentation, slackness and
surface pH on age in forehead skin of women. J Soc Cosm Chem 1984; 35:221–228.
143. Schwindt D, Wilhem KP, Maibach HI. Water diffusion characteristics of human stratum corneum at
different anatomical sites in vivo. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111:385–389.
144. Wilhelm KP, Cua AB, Maibach HI. Skin aging. Effect on transepidermal water loss, stratum corneum
hydration, skin surface pH, and casual sebum content. Arch Dermatol 1991; 127:1806–1809.
145. Pinnagoda J, Tupker RA, Agner T, et al. Guidelines for transepidermal water loss (TEWL)
measurement: a report from the Standardization Group of the European Society of Contact
Dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1990; 22:164–178.
146. Rodrigues L, Pereira LM. Basal transepidermal water loss: right/left forearm difference and motoric
difference. Skin Res Technol 1998; 4:135–137.
147. Agache P, Laurent R, Lardans L, et al. Epiderme, poil, glandes se´bace´es et sudoripares (Epidermis,
hair and sebaceous and sweat glands). In: Prunieras M, ed. Pre´cis de Cosme´tologie Dermatologique.
Paris: Masson Ed, 1990:21–29.
148. Bajor JS, Becker WD, Hillmer S, et al. Measurement and analysis of human surface sebum levels
using the sebumeter. Unilever Research 1998; 110:4, 1287.
149. Rogers J, Harding C, Mayo A, et al. Stratum corneum lipids: the effect of ageing and the seasons.
Arch Dermatol Res 1996; 288:765–770.
150. Yoshikawa N, Imokawa G, Akimoto K, et al. Regional analysis of ceramides within the stratum
corneum in relation to seasonal changes. Dermatology 1994; 188:207–214.
24
Couturaud

=== Page 42 ===
3
Functional Map and Age-Related Differences
in the Human Face: Nonimmunologic Contact
Urticaria Induced by Hexyl Nicotinate
Slaheddine Marrakchi and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Age-related and regional variation studies of the human skin reactivity to various irritants
have been reported (1–5). Marked variation of the various areas of the face in reactivity to the
hydrophilic substance, benzoic acid, has been documented by Shriner (6).
Hexyl nicotinate (HN) is a pale yellow lipophilic substance insoluble in water, but
soluble in ethanol and methanol. It is the ester of hexyl alcohol and nicotinic acid. It is usually
used in a concentration of 2% in the following product types: facial moisturizer, around eye
cream, antiaging, mask, exfoliant, and sunscreen.
In the present study, HN was used to induce nonimmunologic contact urticaria (NICU)
in the same sites documented by Shriner (6). Blood-flow changes were recorded to determine
potential regional and age-related differences in cutaneous vascular reactivity to HN.
CLINICAL STUDY
Two age groups were studied: 10 healthy volunteers in the young group, aged 29.8  3.9 years,
ranging from 24 to 34 years, and 10 in the older group, aged 73.6  17.4, ranging from 66 to
83 years.
Exclusion criteria were a history of atopy and current antihistaminic drug use.
Eight regions (forehead, nose, cheek, nasolabial and perioral areas, chin, neck, and volar
forearm) were studied in terms of pharmacodynamic response to HN.
On the day of the experiment, the subjects were allowed to acclimate to the examination
room for 15 minutes, then, baseline measurements were taken on the studied locations.
Baseline measurements of the cutaneous blood flow were taken using a laser Doppler
flowmeter (LDF) (laser blood-flow monitor MBF3D1, Moor Instruments, England) (7). Blood
flow was monitored at 1 measurement per second for 30 seconds and the values averaged.
Using a saturated absorbent filter paper disc (0.8-cm diameter) (Finn Chamber Epitest
Ltd Oy, Finland), HN 5 mM in ethanol was applied on the eight skin areas for 15 seconds to
elicit NICU. Then blood-flow measurements were taken every 10 minutes for 1 hour in order to
detect the maximum vascular response of the skin to HN.
Room temperature and relative humidity were recorded each time a subject was studied.
Room temperature during the young group study (20.3  2.38C) was significantly ( p ¼ 0.042)
lower than in the older group study (22.1  2.38C).
Relative humidity during the young group study (52.6  3.8) was significantly higher
( p ¼ 0.009) than in the older group study (46.5  5.5).
To compare the measurements of the various skin sites within each group, the ANOVA
test for analysis of variance was used. The two-tailed Student’s t test for unpaired data was
used to compare the differences between the two age groups.
HN chemical structure

=== Page 43 ===
COMPARISONS BETWEEN GROUPS AND SITES
Cutaneous reactivity to HN was assessed by the baseline to peak changes (peak ¼ maximum;
LDF – baseline; LDF). In some investigations, area under the curve was also considered to
assess these changes (6,8,9), but since it was correlated to peak values (6), only the baseline to
peak changes (peak) were considered in our study.
Comparison Between Regions
In the young group, the perioral area, followed by the neck, was the most sensitive to HN. The
perioral and the nasolabial areas, the nose, the forehead, and the neck were more sensitive than
the forearm ( p < 0.05) (Fig. 1). The perioral area ( p ¼ 0.012) and the neck ( p ¼ 0.009) were more
sensitive than the cheek.
In the older group, all the areas of the face were more sensitive than the forearm. The
chin followed by the cheek and the nasolabial area was the most sensitive. However, no
difference in reactivity to HN was found between the various areas of the face. The forearm
was the less-sensitive area in both groups.
Comparison Between the Two Age Groups
Peak values were higher in the older group in three areas: forehead ( p ¼ 0.047), cheek
( p < 0.001), and nasolabial area ( p ¼ 0.012) (Fig. 1).
In the young group, the highest vascular responses to HN were the perioral area and the
neck. In the older group, the chin, cheek, and nasolabial area showed the highest skin reactivity
to HN.
This difference between the two age groups might be partly explained by the enlargement
of the sebaceous glands in the elderly (10), which could be induced by the long-term exposure to
the sun. The UVA has been reported to induce sebaceous gland hyperplasia (11), which might
lead to the enlargement of the sebaceous glands in the face when compared to other areas (12,13)
and in the elderly when compared to the younger subjects (10,14).
Appendages may be an important factor in HN absorption, since the areas in the older
group where peak values were significantly higher than the young group are known to have a
high appendage density (15), and the enlargement of the sebaceous glands in the elderly (10)
might explain that in the older group the absorption of HN seems to be higher where the
appendage density increases.
Figure 1
Baseline LDF to peak changes. Regional variation in the young and old-age groups and age-related
differences.
aThe regions where the difference between the two age groups was significant ( p < 0.05).
Abbreviations: LDF, laser Doppler flowmeter; FH, forehead; NL, nasolabial area; PO, perioral area; FA, forearm.
26
Marrakchi and Maibach

=== Page 44 ===
Reviews and investigative studies that discuss the contribution of the various structures
of the skin in the drug diffusion have been published. Some studies note that the contribution
of the appendages in the skin permeability to chemicals should not be overlooked especially
during the early phase of absorption (16–18). The appendageal route was reported to
contribute to methyl nicotinate transport in the skin (5). Using normal and artificially damaged
skin (without follicles and sebaceous glands), Hueber (19) demonstrated that the appendageal
route accounts for the transport of hydrocortisone and testosterone, but is more important for
this latter and more lipophilic compound. Illel et al. (20), studying rat skin, found that
appendageal diffusion is a major pathway to the absorption of hydrocortisone, caffeine,
niflumic acid, and p-aminobenzoic acid. Other studies (21,22), suggest that intercellular lipids
composition is a major factor in barrier function.
However, one should keep in mind that skin reactivity to HN is probably not the
expression of the sole transcutaneous penetration of the molecule, but also the manifestation of
individual variability in the vascular response to HN and metabolic activity of the skin. Skin
penetration and permeation of drug after topical administration depend on the physicochem-
ical properties of the drug molecule, as well as the function of the skin as a transport barrier,
and can be influenced by the applied formulation. These factors, along with skin first-pass
metabolism and hemodynamic parameters of the cutaneous tissue, determine the bioavail-
ability of topically applied drugs. The site of pharmacologic activity of HN was postulated to
be the blood capillaries next to the epidermis–dermis junction. HN was reported to be
metabolized to nicotinic acid during tissue permeation to an extent limited for the epidermis,
but very pronounced for the dermis (23). The resulting metabolite has the same pharmacologic
effect as the parent compound (24). Skin esterases were reported to be mostly located in the
dermis and in skin-associated glands such as hair follicles (23). There was no esterase activity
in stratum corneum. This metabolic aspect should be considered when biological activity of
various topically applied drugs is studied, as well as the chronobiologic aspect, knowing that
the vasodilatation of peripheral blood vessels after topical application of nicotinates follows a
circadian rhythm, the maximal effect being observed during the day and the minimal at
night (25).
CONCLUSION
Many factors certainly account for the percutaneous absorption of the drugs. Besides the
various physical parameters used in our study, noninvasive methods for the study of the
appendageal density (26) and the stratum corneum lipids composition (27) should be
considered to evaluate the influence of these two parameters on percutaneous absorption of
chemicals.
REFERENCES
1. Gollhausen R, Kligman AM. Human assay for identifying substances which induce non-allergic
contact urticaria: the NICU-test. Contact Dermatitis 1985; 13:98–106.
2. Lotte C, Rougier A, Wilson DR, et al. In vivo relationship between transepidermal water loss and
percutaneous penetration of some organic compounds in man: effect of anatomic site. Arch Dermatol
Res 1987; 279:351–356.
3. Larmi E, Lahti A, Hannuksela M. Immediate contact reactions to benzoic acid and the sodium salt of
pyrrolidone carboxylic acid: comparison of various skin sites. Contact Dermatitis 1989; 20:38–40.
4. Wilhelm K-P, Maibach HI. Factors predisposing to cutaneous irritation. Dermatol Clin 1990; 8:17–22.
5. Tur E, Maibach HI, Guy RH. Percutaneous penetration of methyl nicotinate at three anatomic sites:
evidence for an appendageal contribution to transport? Skin Pharmacol 1991; 4:230–234.
6. Shriner DL, Maibach HI: Regional variation of nonimmunologic contact urticaria: functional map of
the human face. Skin Pharmacol 1996; 9(5):312–321.
7. Bircher A, de Boer EM, Agner T, et al. Guidelines for measurement of cutaneous blood flow by laser
Doppler flowmetry: a report from the standardization Group of the European Society of Contact
Dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1994; 30:65–72.
8. Guy RH, Tur E, Bjerke S, et al. Are their age and racial differences to methyl nicotinate-induced
vasodilation in human skin? J Am Acad Derm 1985; 12:1001–1006.
Functional Map and Age-Related Differences in the Human Face
27

=== Page 45 ===
9. Gean CJ, Tur E, Maibach HI, et al. Cutaneous responses to topical methyl nicotinate in black, oriental,
and caucasian subjects. Arch Dermatol Res 1989; 281:95–98.
10. Kligman AM, Balin AK. Aging of human skin. In: Balin AK, Kligman AM, eds. Aging and the Skin.
New York: Raven Press, 1989:1–42.
11. Lesnik RH, Kligman LH, Kligman AM. Agents that cause enlargement of sebaceous glands in hairless
mice: II ultraviolet radiation. Arch Dermatol Res 1982; 284:106–108.
12. Dimond RL, Montagna W. Histology and cytochemistry of human skin: XXXVI the nose and lips.
Arch Dermatol 1976; 112:1235–1244.
13. Moretti G, Elis RA, Mescon H. Vascular patterns in the skin of the face. J Invest Dermatol 1959; 33:
103–112.
14. Smith L. Histopathologic characteristics and ultra-structure of aging skin. Cutis 1989; 43:419–424.
15. Blume U, Ferracin I, Verschoore M, et al. Physiology of the vellus hair follicle: hair growth and sebum
excretion. Br J Dermatol 1991; 124:21–28.
16. Blank IH, Scheuplein RJ, Macfarlane DJ. Mechanism of percutaneous absorption: III the effect of
temperature on the transport of non-electrolytes across the skin. J Invest Dermatol 1967; 49:582–589.
17. Scheuplein RJ, Blank IH. Permeability of the skin. Physiol Rev 1971; 51:702–747.
18. Idson B. Percutaneous absorption. J Pharm Sci 1975; 64:901–924.
19. Hueber F, Wepierre J, Schaefer H. Role of transepidermal and transfollicular routes in percutaneous
absorption of hydrocortisone and testosterone: in vivo study in the hairless rat. Skin Pharmacol 1992;
5:99–107.
20. Illel B, Schaefer H, Wepierre J, et al. Follicles play an important role in percutaneous absorption.
J Pharm Sci 1991; 80:424–427.
21. Elias PM, Cooper ER, Korc A, et al. Percutaneous transport in relation to stratum corneum structure
and lipid composition. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 76:297–301.
22. Wiechers JW. The barrier function of the skin in relation to percutaneous absorption of drugs. Pharm
Weekbl Sci 1989; 11:185–198.
23. Mu¨ller B, Kasper M, Surber C, et al. Permeation, metabolism and site of action concentration of
nicotinic acid derivatives in human skin correlation with topical pharmacological effect. Eur J Pharm
Sci 2003; 20:181–195.
24. Roberts JL, Morrow JD. Prostaglandin D2 mediates contact urticaria caused by sorbic acid, benzoic
acid and esters of nicotinic acid. In: Amin S, Lahti A, Maibach HI, eds. Contact urticaria syndrome.
Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1997:77–88.
25. Reinberg AE, Soudant E, Koulbanis C, et al. Circadian dosing time dependency in the forearm skin
penetration of methyl and hexyl nicotinate. Life Sci 1995; 57:1507–1513.
26. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. Assessment of aging and actinic damages by cyanoacrylate skin
surface strippings. Am J Dermatopathol 1987; 9:500–509.
27. Wefers H, Melnik BC, Flu¨r M, et al. Influence of UV irradiation on the composition of human stratum
corneum lipids. J Invest Dermatol 1991; 96:959–962.
28
Marrakchi and Maibach

=== Page 46 ===
4
The Baumann Skin-Type Indicator: A Novel
Approach to Understanding Skin Type
Leslie Baumann
University of Miami, Cosmetic Medicine and Research Institute, Miami, Florida, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Over the latter part of the last century, the dry, oily, combination, or sensitive skin-type
classifications, which were identified in the early 1900s by cosmetics magnate Helena
Rubinstein, have held sway in terms of characterizing the skin. While there have been
significant innovations and even more substantial growth in the skin care product market
during this time span, few notable advances have been made to further our understanding or
ability to characterize skin types. Consequently, practitioners have had insufficient informa-
tion to use in divining the most appropriate skin care product selections for their patients. The
Baumann skin-type indicator (BSTI) is a novel approach to categorizing skin types, which
greatly expands on the skin-type designations of Rubinstein and, in the process, provides
assistance to practitioners and patients/consumers alike in making sense of the numerous
available skin care formulations, many of which are now touted for particular skin types, as
well as in selecting the most suitable products. The BSTI is based on the identification of skin
type using four dichotomous parameters characterizing the skin: dry or oily, sensitive or
resistant, pigmented or nonpigmented, and wrinkled or unwrinkled (tight). A four-letter skin-
type designation is derived from the answers to a 64-item questionnaire and considers all the
four skin parameters at once. Sixteen possible skin types, each delineated using the four-letter
code denoting one end of each parameter, characterize the BSTI (Fig. 1). Ideally, patients will
self-administer the BSTI to ascertain baseline skin type and reuse the questionnaire after
significant life changes (e.g., moving to a different climate, pregnancy, menopause, andropause,
chronic stress), which can induce modifications to skin type (1). This chapter focuses on the basic
science underlying the four fundamental skin-type parameters and, in the process, characterizes
in varying levels of depth the 16 skin types. In addition, some attention is paid to treatments,
mainly topical and noninvasive, on the basis of the BSTI system.
SKIN HYDRATION
Oily (O) Vs. Dry (D)
“Dry skin,” also known as xerosis, results from a complex, multifactorial etiology and is
characterized by dull color (usually gray-white), rough texture, and an elevated number of
ridges (2). The primary factors that regulate the level of skin hydration and that contribute to
dry skin are the levels of stratum corneum (SC) lipids, natural moisturizing factor (NMF),
sebum, hyaluronic acid (HA), and aquaporin. The role of the SC and its capacity to maintain
skin hydration is the most important of these factors in terms of dry skin. The SC is composed
primarily of ceramides, fatty acids, and cholesterol. These constituents help protect the skin
and keep it watertight when they are present in the SC in the proper balance. SC equilibrium is
also thought to be maintained via stimulation of keratinocyte lipid production and keratinocyte
proliferation by primary cytokines (3).
When the primary components of the SC are not in proper balance, the skin’s capacity to
maintain water is decreased, and the skin becomes more susceptible to environmental factors.
With the skin barrier thus impaired, transepidermal water loss (TEWL) increases and the skin
is left dry and sensitive. This occurs because the enzymes essential for desmosome metabolism
are inhibited by inadequate hydration, leading to the abnormal desquamation of corneocytes (4).
At the same time, superficial SC desmoglein I levels remain high. The resultant compromised

=== Page 47 ===
Figure 1
The BSTI skin types. The BSTI questionnaire can be located by registering online at http://www.SkinIQ.com. The Web site is frequently
updated with the latest data as new questions are developed. The nonidentifying data collected on this Web site will be used to expand knowledge of skin-
type prevalence around the world.
30
Baumann

=== Page 48 ===
desquamation leads to a visible accrual of keratinocytes, leaving a rough and dry appearance to
the skin (5). Dry skin has also been associated with a perturbation in the lipid bilayer of the SC as
a result of elevated fatty acid levels and reduced ceramide levels (6). Exogenous factors, such as
UV irradiation, acetone, chlorine, detergents, and protracted exposure to or immersion in water,
can also affect and inhibit the lipid bilayer. In addition, recent studies have suggested that local
pH fluctuations may account for the initial cohesion and ultimate desquamation of corneocytes
from the SC surface. These alterations are thought to selectively activate numerous extracellular
proteases in a pH-dependent manner (7).
NMF, derived from the breakdown of the protein filaggrin, is an intracellular,
hygroscopic compound present only in the SC that is released by lamellar bodies and plays
an integral role in maintaining water within skin cells. Filaggrin, which is composed of lactic
acid, urea, citrate, and sugars, imparts structural support and strength to the lower layers of
the SC. A cytosolic protease breaks it down into free amino acids, such as arginine, glutamine
(glutamic acid), and histidine, in the stratum compactum, an outer SC layer (8). These water-
soluble substances remain inside the keratinocytes and avidly cling to water molecules.
Aspartate protease (cathepsin) initiates this chain of events and is believed to regulate the pace
of filaggrin decomposition into NMF as well as the level of NMF (9). It is important to note that
external humidity levels can affect cathepsin, resulting in changes in NMF production. After
an individual enters a low-humidity environment, the pace of NMF production typically increases
over the course of several days of getting acclimated (10). Notably, xerosis and icthyosis vulgaris
are associated with low NMF levels. In addition, UV irradiation and surfactants can inhibit
NMF production. However, NMF production cannot yet be artificially regulated through the
use of any products or procedures.
HA can bind 1000 times its weight in water, and its presence in the dermis assists the
skin in retaining water. HA is also found in the epidermal intercellular spaces, particularly
the middle spinous layer, but is not present in the SC or stratum granulosum (11). Produced
primarily by fibroblasts and keratinocytes, HA has an estimated turnover rate of 2 to 4.5 days
in mammalians (12). Although the role of HA in skin hydration has not been fully elucidated,
aged skin, which is less plump than youthful skin, is characterized by decreased levels
of HA. Significantly, topically applied HA does not penetrate the skin (13). Nevertheless,
several manufacturers include HA in topical skin care products and claim that they are
effective.
Aquaporin-3 (AQP3) is a member of a family of homologous integral membrane proteins
and a subclass of aquaporins called aquaglyceroporins that facilitate water transport and small
neutral solutes, including glycerol and urea, across biological membranes (14). Present in the
urinary, respiratory, and digestive tracts as well as the kidney collecting ducts and, notably,
epidermis, AQP3 was shown recently to be expressed copiously in the plasma membrane of
epidermal keratinocytes in human skin (15). The water conduction function in the skin is
thought to occur along an osmotic gradient below the SC, where high AQP3-mediated water
permeability is manifested. In this context, AQP3 water clamps viable epidermal layers to
promote the hydration of cutaneous layers beneath the SC. A high concentration of solutes
(Na+, K+, and Cl) and a low concentration of water (13–35%) have been shown to exist in the
superficial SC that produce in the steady-state gradients of solutes and water from the skin
surface to the viable epidermal keratinocytes (16–19). Nevertheless, the relationship between
keratinocyte fluid transport and SC hydration as well as the molecular mechanisms of fluid
transport across epidermal keratinocyte layers remains poorly understood. It is thought
though that AQP3 enhances transepidermal water permeability to protect the SC from water
evaporating from the skin surface and/or to spread water gradients throughout the layer of
epidermal keratinocytes (15). In a study evaluating the functional expression of AQP3 in human
skin, researchers observed that the water permeability of human epidermal keratinocytes was
inhibited by mercurials and low pH, which was consistent with AQP3 involvement (15).
Some of the same investigators considered skin phenotype in transgenic mice lacking AQP3
and discovered substantially decreased water and glycerol permeability in AQP3 null mice,
supporting earlier evidence that AQP3 functions as a plasma membrane water/glycerol
transporter in the epidermis (20). In most areas of the skin, conductance measurements revealed
significantly diminished SC water content in the AQP3 null mice. Epidermal cell water
permeability is not an important determinant of SC hydration, however, because water
movement across AQP3 is slower in skin than in other tissues (21). Currently, only extracts of
The Baumann Skin-Type Indicator
31

=== Page 49 ===
the herb Ajuga turkestanica have been demonstrated to exert an influence in regulating
AQP3 (22). Ajuga turkestanica is included as an ingredient in a high-end line of skin care
products. Eventually, pharmacological manipulation of AQP3 may lead to its use in treating
skin conditions caused by excess or reduced hydration.
Sebum, the oily secretion of the sebaceous glands containing wax esters, sterol esters,
cholesterol, di- and triglycerides, and squalene, imparts an oily quality to the skin and is well
known to play an important role in acne development (23). A significant source of vitamin E,
sebum is also believed to confer cutaneous protection from exogenous elements and, perhaps,
when production is decreased, contribute to dry skin (24). The xerosis aspect of this theory has
not received much support though, as low sebaceous activity has not been found to foster dry
skin. In fact, a more complex role for sebum production in the causal pathway of xerosis has been
expounded. It has been previously assumed that sebum does not alter epidermal permeability
barrier function because skin with few sebaceous glands, such as that in prepubertal children,
manifests normal basal barrier function (25). Indeed, prepubertal children (aged 2–9 years)
often present with eczematous patches (pityriasis alba) on the face and trunk, which are not
associated with sebaceous gland activity. In addition, the pharmacological involution of sebaceous
glands with supraphysiological doses of isotretinoin has no impact on barrier function or SC
lamellar membranes (26–28).
Although sebum levels do not alter barrier function, sebum may still play a role in the
etiology of xerosis in people with dry, resistant skin (DR in the BSTI system). Lipids from
meibomian glands, which are modified sebaceous glands found in the eyes, act against
dryness by preventing tear evaporation (29,30). TEWL is prevented in a similar fashion, as
sebum-derived fats form a lipid film over the skin surface. This theory received support from
a recent study that assessed permeability barrier homeostasis and SC hydration in asebia J1
mice that demonstrated sebaceous gland hypoplasia (31). Investigators observed normal
barrier function in these sebum-deficient mice, which they ascribed to unaltered levels of the
three primary barrier lipids—ceramides, free sterols, and free fatty acids—and the persistence of
normal SC extracellular membranes. The mice did exhibit reduced SC hydration, however,
suggesting that an intact intercellular membrane bilayer system, although sufficient for
permeability barrier homeostasis, does not necessarily imply normal SC hydration. It is worth
noting that normal SC hydration levels were restored with the topical application of glycerol.
Sebaceous gland-derived triglycerides are hydrolyzed to glycerol before they are transported to
the skin surface in normal skin. In individuals with low sebum production, replacing this
glycerol may be an effective way to ease their xerosis. Using glycerol has also been demonstrated
to be successful in accelerating SC recovery (32).
Patients rarely, if ever, complain about reduced sebum production, but elevated sebum
production, yielding oily skin that can be a precursor to acne, is a common complaint. Several
factors are known to influence sebum production. Age, in particular, has a significant and
well-known impact, as sebum levels are usually low in childhood, rise in the middle-to-late
teen years, and remain stable into the seventh and eighth decades until endogenous androgen
synthesis dwindles (33). Sebum production is also affected by one’s genetic background, diet,
stress, and hormone levels. In a study of 20 pairs each of identical and nonidentical like-sex
twins, nearly equivalent sebum excretion rates with significantly differing acne severity were
observed in the identical twins, but a significant divergence was seen in both parameters
among the nonidentical twins, suggesting that acne development is influenced by genetic and
exogenous factors (34). Using oral retinoids to reduce sebaceous glands is a well-established
approach, but this capacity has not been demonstrated in topical retinoids. No topical products
have been shown to lower sebum production.
Skin Care for the O–D Parameter
An intact SC and barrier, normal NMF and HA levels, normal AQP3 expression, and balanced
sebum secretion are qualities of the skin that fall in the middle of the oily–dry spectrum.
Increased sebum secretion, regardless of whether it contributes to acne development, is
typically the reason that the skin may be described as falling on the oily side of this continuum.
Oily skin that is also prone to acne would be characterized as oily, sensitive (OS within the
BSTI framework), as acne-infiltrated skin is distinguished by heightened sensitivity (see
section “Acne Type”). Treatment for individuals with OS skin should concentrate on lowering
sebum levels using retinoids, reducing or eliminating cutaneous bacteria with antibiotics,
32
Baumann

=== Page 50 ===
benzoyl peroxide, or other antimicrobials, and complementing with anti-inflammatory agents.
Individuals with oily skin but no acne (the OR type within the BSTI) should be treated only to
decrease sebum production, unless other skin-type parameters dictate otherwise (e.g.,
hyperpigmentation or wrinkling). Sebum secretion has been shown to be effectively reduced
using oral ketoconazole as well as oral retinoids, but no topical products have yet shown such
success (35,36). Further, unwanted sebum in OR skin can be camouflaged using sebum-
absorbing polymers and talc.
Treatment of dry skin starts with the identification of factors contributing to dryness. The
other BSTI skin parameters can provide clues. The skin barrier is likely impaired in a patient
whose skin is dry and sensitive (DS in the BSTI system). To treat such skin, products that repair
the skin barrier (i.e., formulations that include fatty acids, cholesterol, ceramides, or glycerol)
should be used. In a patient with dry photodamaged skin (with a high score on the W vs. T
parameter), lower HA levels likely account, at least in part, for the dryness. Skin care products
that include HA are useless in this context as topically applied HA is not absorbed into the skin.
Recent studies have suggested that HA levels may be boosted through the use of glucosamine
supplements (37). The role of glucosamine has not been established though, as one small single-
blind study demonstrated wrinkle enhancement but no improvement in skin hydration (38). Dry
skin that is habitually exposed to the sun likely exhibits an impaired skin barrier and diminished
NMF. Treatment for such skin should concentrate on repairing the barrier and reducing or
avoiding sun exposure. If sun exposure cannot be avoided, adequate sun protection is necessary,
of course.
Harsh foaming detergents, which remove hydrating lipids and NMF from the skin,
should be avoided by all patients with dry skin. Such detergents are found in body and
facial cleansers as well as in laundry and dish cleansers. All patients with dry skin should
also abstain from bathing for prolonged periods, especially in hot or chlorinated water.
Humidifiers are recommended for people with very dry skin who live in low-humidity
environments, as application of moisturizers is recommended two to three times daily and
after bathing. Several over-the-counter (OTC) moisturizers (e.g., occlusives, humectants, and
emollients) are effective in hydrating the skin and serve as worthy adjuncts to the aforementioned
pharmacological and behavioral approaches to treating dry skin. Indeed, moisturizers are the
third most often recommended type of OTC topical skin product (39). Moisturizers are typically
formulated as water-in-oil emulsions (e.g., hand creams) and oil-in-water emulsions (e.g., creams
and lotions).
SKIN SENSITIVITY
Sensitive (S) Vs. Resistant (R)
A potent SC that provides especially reliable protection to the skin, rendering harmless allergens
and numerous irritating exogenous substances, characterizes resistant skin. Individuals with
such skin are unlikely to experience erythema (unless overexposed to the sun) or acne (though
stress or hormonal fluctuations could lead to a breakout). Such skin also confers an interesting
set of advantages and disadvantages. On the positive side, resistant skin allows for the use of
most skin care formulations with an extremely low probability of incurring adverse reactions
(e.g., acne, rashes, or a stinging sensation). However, resistant skin also renders many skin
care products ineffective, with individuals with such skin experiencing difficulty in detecting
differences among cosmetic formulations and exhibiting an exceedingly high threshold for
product penetration and efficacy.
Sensitive skin is more complex than resistant skin in terms of characterization, presentation,
diagnosis, and treatment. Nevertheless, the diagnosis of sensitive skin is increasingly common
(40). The majority of people that complain to a dermatologist about sensitive skin are healthy
women of childbearing age. On an individual basis, sensitive skin incidence diminishes with
age, fortunately. The prevalence of sensitive skin continues to increase, though. While
numerous skin care products are increasingly touted as suitable for sensitive skin, such skin
remains challenging to treat. Variations in the qualities of sensitive skin and poor self-
diagnosis account for this difficulty. Indeed, four discrete subtypes of sensitive skin have been
identified: acne type, rosacea type, stinging type, and allergic type. Consequently, the products
marketed for sensitive skin are not necessarily suitable for all sensitive skin subtypes, which is
The Baumann Skin-Type Indicator
33

=== Page 51 ===
a phenomenon that presents some unusual treatment challenges. All four sensitive skin
subtypes do share a significant feature, though: inflammation. The treatment approach to any
kind of sensitive skin understandably begins with a focus on alleviating and eliminating
inflammation. Treatment for patients with more than one sensitive skin subtype, which is not
uncommon, is, of course, more complicated.
Acne Type
This is the most common subtype of sensitive skin because of the prevalence of acne, which
is by far the most common skin disease. Individuals with such sensitivity are prone to
developing acne, black heads, or white heads. Acne typically affects adolescent and young
adults, equally by sex, between 11 to 25 years old. Most of the remainder of the millions of
those suffering from acne are adult women, who display a hormonal aspect to their acne. The
complex interplay of four primary factors is at the heart of acne pathogenesis: an increase in
sebum production, clogging of pores (which results from dead keratinocytes inside the hair
follicles clinging more strongly than in people without acne and can also result from elevated
sebum production), presence of the bacteria Propionibacterium acnes, and inflammation.
Significantly, acne can occur as a result of various causal pathways or in idiopathic
presentations, but the sine qua non of the condition is the amassing and adherence of dead
keratinocytes in the hair follicles due to elevated sebum production, leading to clogged follicles
and appearance of a papule or pustule. This is followed by the migration of P. acnes into the
hair follicle, where the combination of the bacteria, sebum, and dead keratinocytes stimulates
the release of cytokines and other inflammatory factors. In turn, an inflammatory response is
provoked that manifests in the formation of redness and pus. Indeed, in chronic inflammatory
conditions such as acne, high levels of primary cytokines, chemokines, and other inflammatory
markers are typically present (3). To treat acne, the therapeutic intention is to target the four
main etiological factors. This translates to decreasing sebum production (using retinoids, oral
contraceptives, and/or stress reduction), unclogging pores (using retinoids, a-hydroxy acids,
or b-hydroxy acid), eliminating bacteria (using benzoyl peroxide, sulfur, antibiotics, or azelaic
acid), and reducing inflammation (using any of a wide array of anti-inflammatory products).
Rosacea Type
The acneiform condition rosacea affects 14 million people in the United States, typically
adults aged between 25 and 60 years, according to the National Rosacea Society (41). Those
with the rosacea subtype of sensitive skin exhibit a tendency toward recurrent flushing,
facial redness, and experiencing hot sensations. The etiology of rosacea remains elusive, but
this condition shares the aforementioned symptoms with acne, along with papules, but is
distinguished by the formation of salient telangiectases. Avoiding the triggers that exacerbate
symptoms is, of course, recommended for rosacea treatment, as is using anti-inflammatory
ingredients to reduce the dilation of the blood vessels. Eosinophils, which are versatile
leukocytes, contribute to the initiation and promotion of various inflammatory responses
(42,43). The aim of rosacea therapy is to inhibit eosinophilic activity, decrease vascular
reactivity, neutralize free radicals, and hinder immune function, the arachidonic acid pathway,
and degranulation of mast cells (which frequently migrate to areas of eosinophil-mediated
disease). Several anti-inflammatory medications are available for the treatment of rosacea,
including antibiotics, immune modulators, and steroids. The most effective anti-inflammatory
ingredients (many of which are botanically derived) in the copious supply of topical rosacea
therapeutic agents include aloe vera, arnica, chamomile, colloidal oatmeal, cucumber extract,
feverfew, licochalcone, niacinamide, quadrinone, salicylic acid, sulfacetamide, sulfur, witch
hazel, and zinc (44).
Stinging Type
People with this particular subset of sensitive skin exhibit a predilection to experiencing
stinging or burning sensations in response to various factors and triggers. This tendency is
best characterized as a nonallergic neural sensitivity. “Stingers” or the stinging tendency can
be identified through the use of numerous tests. The lactic acid stinging test is the best-
regarded, standard way to assess patients who complain of invisible and subjective
cutaneous irritation (45). This test has, in fact, been used to show that individuals with
“sensitive skin” experienced a much stronger stinging sensation than those in a healthy
34
Baumann

=== Page 52 ===
control group (46). It is worth noting that erythema does not necessarily accompany the
stinging sensation, as many patients report stinging without experiencing redness or
irritation (47). Nevertheless, exposure to lactic acid is more likely to elicit stinging in patients
with rosacea distinguished by facial flushing (48). Topical products that contain a-hydroxy
acids (particularly glycolic acid), benzoic acid, bronopol, cinnamic acid compounds, Dowicel
200, formaldehyde, lactic acid, propylene glycol, quaternary ammonium compounds,
sodium lauryl sulfate, sorbic acid, urea, or vitamin C should be avoided by patients that
are confirmed to have the stinging subtype of sensitive skin.
Allergic Type
Over the course of a year, the use of personal care products, including deodorants, perfumes,
nail cosmetics, as well as skin and hair care products, elicit adverse reactions in 23% of women
and 13.8% of men, according to a recent epidemiological survey in the United Kingdom (49).
Individuals with the allergic subtype of sensitive skin are more prone to exhibit erythema,
pruritus, and skin flaking. Patients tested for allergies to cosmetic ingredients are typically
patch tested for 20 to 100 ingredients, with erythema or edema in the tested area indicating an
allergy to the particular ingredient. Several studies have demonstrated that approximately 10%
of dermatological patients who were patch tested were found to have an allergy to at least one
ingredient common in cosmetic products (50). Fragrances and preservatives are the most
common allergens, and most reactions, approximately 80%, arise in women aged 20 to 60 years
(50). Overexposure to common allergens, by using several skin care products, raises the risk of
inducing allergic reactions. In particular, individuals with the D skin type (within the BSTI
system) who have an impaired SC manifested by xerosis are more likely to exhibit an increased
incidence of allergic reactions to topically applied allergens (51).
On the basis of the guidelines of the BSTI, oil control is necessary for those with OS skin.
An acne or rosacea regimen would also likely be necessary for the OS type. Treatment to repair
the SC is indicated for people with DS skin. Therapy to ameliorate wrinkles and to prevent the
development of new ones is recommended for individuals with sensitive, wrinkled (SW) skin.
Frequently, people with sensitive, pigmented (SP) skin request procedures or topical applications
to reduce or remove hyperpigmentation and therapy to lessen the likelihood of developing new
dyschromias.
SKIN PIGMENTATION: PIGMENTED (P) VS. NONPIGMENTED (N)
This skin-type parameter refers to the proclivity to develop unwanted hyperpigmentations on
the face or chest. Within the BSTI framework, the focus is on the pigmentary changes or
conditions that can be ameliorated with topical skin care products or minor dermatological
procedures. In this context, melasma, solar lentigos, ephelides, and postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation are representative conditions for the pigmented skin type. Considerable anxiety is
often associated with the presentation of these skin lesions, and patients often pay substantial
sums in the attempt to treat these conditions. To best treat these pigmentary problems, it is
incumbent upon the physician to understand the source of pigmentation. In addition, the
practitioner can be well served in terms of making suitable product selections for patients to
place such knowledge within the context of other aspects of an individual patient’s full
(BSTI) skin type.
The enzymatic breakdown of tyrosine into dihydrophenylalanine (DOPA) and then
dopaquinone leads to the synthesis of two types of skin pigment (melanin), eumelanin and
pheomelanin (52). These skin pigments (of which eumelanin is the more abundant and which
regularly correlates with the visual phenotype) are produced by melanocytes, which use
melanosomes to transport the pigments to keratinocytes (53). One melanocyte is typically
attached to approximately 30 keratinocytes. Melanosomes are surrounded by keratinocytes,
which absorb the melanin after activation of the protease-activated receptor (PAR)-2 (54).
Expressed in keratinocytes but not melanocytes, PAR-2 is a seven transmembrane G-protein-
coupled trypsin/tryptase receptor activated by a serine protease cleavage. PAR-2 is believed to
regulate pigmentation via exchanges between keratinocytes and melanocytes (55). Notably,
melanogenesis can also be initiated by UV irradiation. Under these conditions, melanogenesis
is a defensive manifestation to protect the skin and is characterized by accelerated melanin
The Baumann Skin-Type Indicator
35

=== Page 53 ===
synthesis and transfer to keratinocytes, leading to darkening of the skin in the exposed areas (56).
Melanocytes synthesize more melanin in darker-skinned people, and their larger melanosomes
accommodate this comparatively greater abundance of melanin and consequently break down
more slowly than in lighter-skinned people (55).
Inhibiting tyrosinase, thus preventing melanin formation, and blocking the transfer of
melanin into keratinocytes represent the two main pathways through which the development
of skin pigmentation can be hindered. Hydroquinone, vitamin C, kojic acid, arbutin, mulberry
extract, and licorice extract are the most effective tyrosinase inhibitors. Skin pigmentation is
also thought to be inhibited by two small proteins contained in soy—soybean trypsin inhibitor
(STI) and Bowman–Birk inhibitor (BBI). Both STI and BBI have been shown in vitro and in vivo
to exhibit depigmenting activity and to prevent UV-induced pigmentation by inhibiting the
cleavage of PAR-2 (57). Consequently, STI and BBI are thought to influence melanosome
transfer into keratinocytes, thereby exerting an effect on pigmentation. Niacinamide, a vitamin
B3 derivative, has also been demonstrated to hinder the melanosome transfer from melanocytes
to keratinocytes (58). Soy and niacinamide, the most effective PAR-2 blockers, are the main
agents for preventing this transfer.
There are three classes of topical agents used within the two pathways of inhibiting
melanin formation. In addition to the inhibitors of tyrosinase and PAR-2, exfoliating products
(e.g., a-hydroxy acids, b-hydroxy acid, retinoids) have the capacity to increase cell turnover
to outpace the rate of melanin production. Such exfoliation can also be achieved through
microdermabrasion and the use of facial scrubs. Broad-spectrum sunscreens should also be
employed in any skin care program intended to reduce or eliminate undesired pigmentation.
The most effective way of preventing pigmentary alterations remains the avoidance of chronic
sun exposure. Within the BSTI framework, a person with a penchant for developing unwanted
dyspigmentations has “P” type skin, or, otherwise, “N” type skin.
SKIN AGING: WRINKLED (W) VS. TIGHT (T)
Cutaneous aging is a complex multifactorial phenomenon described in terms of endogenous
and exogenous influences that ultimately manifest in alterations to the outward appearance of
the skin. Endogenous aging—known as natural, chronological, or intrinsic aging in this case—
is a function of heredity or cellular programming. The aging-related manifestations of such
forces that occur over time are, therefore, considered inevitable and beyond human volition.
Exogenous aging—known typically as extrinsic aging—is driven by chronic exposure to the
sun and other deleterious environmental elements (e.g., cigarette smoke, poor nutrition) and,
therefore, can be avoided, though not always easily. While these etiological strains appear, and
have been typically evaluated, as discrete processes, recent findings suggest that UV irradiation—
the leading cause of extrinsic aging—may also alter the normal course of chronological aging.
Therefore, it is possible that there is a significant overlap in the processes of intrinsic and extrinsic
aging. For the purposes of this discussion, however, intrinsic and extrinsic aging will be
considered separately.
Cellular or intrinsic aging is currently best understood with reference to telomeres,
specialized structures that shield the ends of chromosomes. Telomere length shortens with age,
and this erosion is considered an internal aging clock as well as the source for one of the
currently espoused theories on chronological aging (59). The enzyme telomerase, which
lengthens telomeres and imparts stability, is expressed in approximately 90% of all tumors and
in the epidermis, but is absent in several somatic tissues (59,60). This suggests that most cancer
cells, as opposed to normal healthy cells, are not programed for apoptosis or cell death. For this
reason, cancer and aging are thought to represent opposite sides of the same coin. Current
knowledge regarding telomeres and telomerase has not yet been harnessed for any viable
antiaging therapies, primarily because little is known regarding the safety of artificially
increasing telomere length.
As implied in the definition, extrinsic aging is a premature aging of the skin that is the
result of the interplay of external factors and human behaviors resulting in the chronic
exposure to such factors, and thus falls within the realm of human control. By far, exposure to
UV irradiation is the leading cause of extrinsic aging; indeed, such premature aging is often
referred to as photoaging. Of course, other factors such as smoking, other pollution, poor
36
Baumann

=== Page 54 ===
nutrition, excessive alcohol consumption, and protracted stress among additional exogenous
influences can contribute to accelerating cutaneous aging. Significantly, photodamage
precedes photoaging, and this evolves through several mechanisms, including the formation
of sunburn cells, thymine and pyrimidine dimers, production of collagenase, and induction of
an inflammatory response. In addition, photodamage and aging have been associated
with signaling through the p53 pathway subsequent to UV-induced (especially by UVB)
telomere disturbance (61,62). The best-known deleterious effects of UV (UVA, 320–400 nm, in
particular) include photoaging, photoimmunosuppression, and photocarcinogenesis, but
much has yet to be discovered regarding the mechanisms through which UV irradiation
engenders such extensive harm (63). Nevertheless, as the aforementioned theory implies,
intrinsic aging can be thought to be impacted by the primary source of extrinsic aging, as
chronic UV exposure can damage DNA and accelerate the diminution of telomeres, which is
known to play a role in chronological aging.
Cutaneous aging is evidenced, first and foremost, by the formation of rhytides, which
develop in the dermis. Because few topical skin care products can actually penetrate to this
layer of the skin to affect wrinkles, the dermatological approach to antiaging skin care
concentrates on preventing the formation of wrinkles (64). This translates to a focus on
replenishing or maintaining the three primary structural constituents of the skin, collagen,
elastin, and HA, which are known to degrade with age. Despite the inadequacy of most topical
formulations to deliver active ingredients that alter these components, some products have
been shown to exert such an impact on collagen and HA. Specifically, collagen synthesis has
been shown to be spurred by topical retinoids, vitamin C, and copper peptide as well as oral
vitamin C (65–67). The synthesis of HA and elastin has been demonstrated in animal models to
be stimulated by retinoids (68,69). In addition, HA levels are thought to be enhanced through
glucosamine supplementation (37). However, no products have yet been demonstrated or
approved for inducing the production of elastin.
Collagen, elastin, and HA can also be broken down by inflammation; therefore, targeting
ways to reduce inflammation represents another significant approach to preventing or
mitigating cutaneous aging. Skin inflammation can result from reactive oxygen species (ROS)
or free radicals acting directly on growth factor and cytokine receptors in keratinocytes and
dermal cells. Although their effects on cutaneous aging are not fully understood, growth
factors and cytokines are known to act synergistically in a complex process involving several
types of growth factors and cytokines (70). Antioxidants protect the skin from ROS via various
mechanisms not yet fully explained. However, the events through which ROS directly impact
the aging process are known. UV exposure is thought to induce a chain of events, acting on
growth factors and cytokine receptors in keratinocytes and dermal cells. This yields downstream
signal transduction from the activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways,
which accrue in the cell nuclei, developing into cFos/cJun complexes of transcription factor
activator protein 1, in turn leading to the breakdown of cutaneous collagen as a result of the
induction of matrix metalloproteinases, including collagenase, stromelysin, and 92-kDa
gelatinase (71,72). The use of antioxidants is thought to delay or act against photoaging in this
context by preventing these pathways from synthesizing collagenase. Kang et al. demonstrated
that production of the UV-induced cJun-driven enzyme collagenase was inhibited by the
pretreatment of human skin with the antioxidants genistein and N-acetyl cysteine.
Numerous antioxidants, such as vitamins C and E, and coenzyme Q10, as well as
botanically derived ingredients (e.g., caffeine, coffeeberry, ferulic acid, feverfew, grape seed
extract, green tea, idebenone, mushrooms, polypodium leucotomos, pomegranate, pycnoge-
nol, resveratrol, rosemary, silymarin) are found in skin care products. Despite compelling
evidence in the literature substantiating the potency of these antioxidant ingredients, there is a
paucity of data demonstrating their efficacy in topical formulations. Research is ongoing to
harness their potential in such products, however. Research and development might also yield
technological advances in tissue engineering and gene therapy that result in innovative
therapeutic applications of growth factors, cytokines, and, perhaps, telomerase (73). Currently,
the best approaches to combat cutaneous aging remain behavioral—avoiding sun exposure
(particularly between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m.); using broad-spectrum sunscreen daily; avoiding
cigarette smoke, pollution, and excessive consumption of alcohol; reducing stress; eating a diet
high in fruits and vegetables; taking oral antioxidant supplements or topical antioxidant
formulations; and regularly using prescription retinoids.
The Baumann Skin-Type Indicator
37

=== Page 55 ===
CONCLUSION
The four traditional expressions used to describe skin type have remained prominent and
largely unchallenged over the last century. However, the terms “dry,” “oily,” “combination,”
and “sensitive” as characterizations of the skin have been found to be inadequate guides or
gauges for finding the most suitable formulations among the ever-burgeoning supply of skin
care products. The BSTI proposes that four fundamental skin parameters, covering the spectra
from dry to oily, sensitive to resistant, pigmented to nonpigmented, and wrinkled to tight, can
be used to better understand and more accurately depict the nature of human skin and identify
an individual’s skin type among the 16 possible permutations. Because the skin qualities
described in the BSTI are not mutually exclusive, all four parameters must be considered when
identifying skin type. A four-letter BSTI code is derived from answers to a 64-item self-
administered questionnaire, with each letter corresponding to the end of the spectrum of each
parameter that an individual favors. With this code, consumers and physicians can more
readily select the most suitable OTC skin products, and practitioners may be assisted in
treating various skin conditions with the topical formulations most appropriate for a patient’s
skin type.
REFERENCES
1. Baumann L. The Skin Type Solution. New York: Bantam Dell, 2006.
2. Chernosky ME. Clinical aspects of dry skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1976; 65:376.
3. Elias PM. Stratum corneum defensive functions: an integrated view. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 125(2):
183–200.
4. Wildnauer RH, Bothwell JW, Douglass AB. Stratum corneum biomechanical properties. I. Influence of
relative humidity on normal and extracted human stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1971; 56:72.
5. Orth D, Appa Y. Glycerine: a natural ingredient for moisturizing skin. In: Loden M, Maibach H, eds.
Dry Skin and Moisturizersy. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2000:214.
6. Rawlings A, Hope J, Rogers J, et al. Skin Dryness—What is it. J Invest Dermatol 1993; 100:510.
7. Ekholm IE, Brattsand M, Egelrud T. Stratum corneum tryptic enzyme in normal epidermis: a missing
link in the desquamation process? J Invest Dermatol 2000; 114(1):56–63.
8. Elias PM. The epidermal permeability barrier: from the early days at Harvard to emerging concepts.
J Invest Dermatol 2004; 122(2):xxxvi–xxxix.
9. Scott IR, Harding CR. Filaggrin breakdown to water binding compounds during development of the
rat stratum corneum is controlled by the water activity of the environment. Dev Biol 1986; 115:84–92.
10. Sato J, Denda M, Chang S, et al. Abrupt decreases in environmental humidity induce abnormalities in
permeability barrier homeostasis. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 119:900–904.
11. Sakai S, Yasuda R, Sayo T, et al. Hyaluronan exists in the normal stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol
2000; 114:1184–1187.
12. Tammi R, Sa¨a¨ma¨nen AM, Maibach HI, et al. Degradation of newly synthesized high molecular mass
hyaluronan in the epidermal and dermal compartments of human skin in organ culture. J Invest
Dermatol 1991; 97:126–130.
13. Rieger M. Hyaluronic acid in cosmetics. Cosm Toil 1998; 113(3):35–42.
14. Wang F, Feng XC, Li YM, et al. Aquaporins as potential drug targets. Acta Pharmacol Sin 2006;
27(4):395–401.
15. Sougrat R, Morand M, Gondran C, et al. Functional expression of AQP3 in human skin epidermis and
reconstructed epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 118(4):678–685.
16. Takenouchi M, Suzuki H, Tagami H. Hydration characteristics of pathologic stratum corneum—
evaluation of bound water. J Invest Dermatol 1986; 87:574–576.
17. Warner RR, Bush RD, Ruebusch NA. Corneocytes undergo systematic changes in element
concentrations across the human inner stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1995; 104:530–536.
18. Warner RR, Myers MC, Taylor DA. Electron probe analysis of human skin: element concentration
profiles. J Invest Dermatol 1988; 90:78–85.
19. Warner RR, Myers MC, Taylor DA. Electron probe analysis of human skin: determination of the water
concentration profile. J Invest Dermatol 1988; 90:218–224.
20. Ma T, Hara M, Sougrat R, et al. Impaired stratum corneum hydration in mice lacking epidermal water
channel aquaporin-3. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:17147–17153.
21. Yang B, Verkman AS. Water and glycerol permeabilities of aquaporins 1-5 and MIP determined
quantitatively by expression of epitope-tagged constructs in Xenopus oocytes. J Biol Chem 1997;
272:16140–16146.
38
Baumann

=== Page 56 ===
22. Dumas M, Gondran C, Barre P, et al. Effect of an Ajuga turkestanica extract on aquaporin 3
expression, water flux, differentiation and barrier parameters of the human epidermis. Eur J Dermatol
2002; 12(6):XXV–XXVI.
23. Thiboutot D. Regulation of human sebaceous glands. J Invest Dermatol 2004; 123(1):1–12.
24. Clarys P, Barel A. Quantitative evaluation of skin surface lipids. Clin Dermatol 1995; 13(4):307–321.
25. Thody AJ, Shuster S. Control and function of sebaceous glands. Physiol Rev 1989; 69:383–416.
26. Gomez EC. Differential effect of 13-cis-retinoic acid and an aromatic retinoid (Ro 10–9359) on the
sebaceous glands of the hamster flank organ. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 76:68–69.
27. Geiger JM. Retinoids and sebaceous gland activity. Dermatology 1995; 191:305–310.
28. Elias PM, Fritsch PO, Lampe M, et al. Retinoid effects on epidermal structure, differentiation, and
permeability. Lab Invest 1981; 44:531–540.
29. Mathers WD, Lane JA. Meibomian gland lipids, evaporation, and tear film stability. Adv Exp Med
Biol 1998; 438:349–360.
30. Tiffany JM. The role of meibomian secretion in the tears. Trans Ophthalmol Soc U K 1985; 104:396–401.
31. Fluhr JW, Mao-Qiang M, Brown BE, et al. Glycerol regulates stratum corneum hydration in sebaceous
gland deficient (asebia) mice. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):728–737.
32. Fluhr JW, Gloor M, Lehmann L, et al. Glycerol accelerates recovery of barrier function in vivo. Acta
Derm Venereol 1999; 79:418–421.
33. Pochi PE, Strauss JS, Downing DT. Age-related changes in sebaceous gland activity. J Invest Dermatol
1979; 73(1):108–111.
34. Walton S, Wyatt EH, Cunliffe WJ. Genetic control of sebum excretion and acne—a twin study. Br J
Dermatol 1988; 118(3):393–396.
35. De Pedrini P, Rapisarda R, Spano G. The effect of ketoconazole on sebum secretion in patients
suffering from acne and seborrhoea. Int J Tissue React 1988; 10(2):111–113.
36. Goldstein JA, Socha-Szott A, Thomsen RJ, et al. Comparative effect of isotretinoin and etretinate on
acne and sebaceous gland secretion. J Am Acad Dermatol 1982; 6(4 pt 2 suppl):760–765.
37. Matheson AJ, Perry CM. Glucosamine: a review of its use in the management of osteoarthritis. Drugs
Aging 2003; 20(14):1041–1060.
38. Murad H, Tabibian MP. The effect of an oral supplement containing glucosamine, amino acids,
minerals, and antioxidants on cutaneous aging: a preliminary study. J Dermatolog Treat 2001; 12(1):
47–51.
39. Vogel CA, Balkrishnan R, Fleischer AB, et al. Over-the-counter topical skin care products—a common
component of skin disease management. Cutis 2004; 74(1):55–67.
40. Draelos ZD. Cosmetic selection in the sensitive-skin patient. Dermatol Ther 2001; 14:194.
41. National Rosacea Society. Available at: http://www.rosacea.org/index.php. Accessed December 01,
2007.
42. Rothenberg ME, Hogan SP. The eosinophil. Annu Rev Immunol 2006; 24:147–174.
43. Shakoory B, Fitzgerald SM, Lee SA, et al. The role of human mast cell-derived cytokines in eosinophil
biology. J Interferon Cytokine Res 2004; 24(5):271–281.
44. Brown DJ, Dattner AM. Phytotherapeutic approaches to common dermatologic conditions. Arch
Dermatol 1998; 134(11):1401–1404.
45. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. A method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied substances.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:197.
46. Seidenari S, Francomano M, Mantovani L. Baseline biophysical parameters in subjects with sensitive
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38(6):311–315.
47. Basketter DA, Griffiths HA. A study of the relationship between susceptibility to skin stinging and
skin irritation. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 29(4):185–188.
48. Lonne-Rahm SB, Fischer T, Berg M. Stinging and rosacea. Acta Derm Venereol 1999; 79(6):460–461.
49. Orton DI, Wilkinson JD. Cosmetic allergy: incidence, diagnosis, and management. Am J Clin Dermatol
2004; 5(5):327–337.
50. Mehta SS, Reddy BS. Cosmetic dermatitis—current perspectives. Int J Dermatol 2003; 42(7):533–542.
51. Jovanovic M, Poljacki M, Duran V, et al. Contact allergy to Compositae plants in patients with atopic
dermatitis. Med Pregl 2004; 57(5–6):209–218.
52. Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al., eds. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 5th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999:996.
53. Wakamatsu K, Kavanagh R, Kadekaro AL, et al. Diversity of pigmentation in cultured human
melanocytes is due to differences in the type as well as quantity of melanin. Pigment Cell Res 2006; 19(2):
154–162.
54. Jimbow K, Sugiyama S. Melanosomal translocation and transfer. In: Nordlund JJ, Boissy RE,
Hearing VJ, et al., eds. The Pigmentary System. Physiology and Pathophysiology. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1998.
55. Szabo G, Gerald AB, Pathak MA, et al. Racial differences in the fate of melanosomes in human
epidermis. Nature 1969; 222(198):1081–1082.
The Baumann Skin-Type Indicator
39

=== Page 57 ===
56. Hermanns JF, Petit L, Martalo O, et al. Unraveling the patterns of subclinical pheomelanin-enriched
facial hyperpigmentation: effect of depigmenting agents. Dermatology 2000; 201(2):118–122.
57. Paine C, Sharlow E, Liebel F, et al. An alternative approach to depigmentation by soybean extracts via
inhibition of the PAR-2 pathway. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 116(4):587–595.
58. Hakozaki T, Minwalla L, Zhuang J, et al. The effect of niacinamide on reducing cutaneous
pigmentation and suppression of melanosome transfer. Br J Dermatol 2002; 147(1):20–31.
59. Boukamp P. Ageing mechanisms: the role of telomere loss. Clin Exp Dermatol 2001; 26(7):562–565.
60. Boukamp P. Skin aging: a role for telomerase and telomere dynamics? Curr Mol Med 2005; 5(2):
171–177.
61. Kosmadaki MG, Gilchrest BA. The role of telomeres in skin aging/photoaging. Micron 2004; 35(3):
155–159.
62. Kappes UP, Luo D, Potter M, et al. Short- and long-wave UV light (UVB and UVA) induce similar
mutations in human skin cells. J Invest Dermatol 2006; 126(3):667–675.
63. Marrot L, Belaı¨di JP, Meunier JR. Importance of UVA photoprotection as shown by phenotoxic related
endpoints: DNA damage and p53 status. Mutat Res 2005; 571(1–2):175–184.
64. Baumann L. How to prevent photoaging? J Invest Dermatol 2005; 125(4):xii–xiii.
65. Varani J, Warner RL, Gharaee-Kermani M, et al. Vitamin A antagonizes decreased cell growth and
elevated collagen-degrading matrix metalloproteinases and stimulates collagen accumulation in
naturally aged human skin. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 114(3):480–486.
66. Nusgens BV, Humbert P, Rougier A, et al. Topically applied vitamin C enhances the mRNA level of
collagens I and III, their processing enzymes and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1 in the
human dermis. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 116(6):853–859.
67. Kockaert M, Neumann M. Systemic and topical drugs for aging skin. J Drugs Dermatol 2003; 2(4):
435–441.
68. Margelin D, Medaisko C, Lombard D, et al. Hyaluronic acid and dermatan sulfate are selectively
stimulated by retinoic acid in irradiated and nonirradiated hairless mouse skin. J Invest Dermatol
1996; 106(3):505–509.
69. Tajima S, Hayashi A, Suzuki T. Elastin expression is up-regulated by retinoic acid but not by retinol in
chick embryonic skin fibroblasts. J Dermatol Sci 1997; 15(3):166–172.
70. Fitzpatrick RE. Endogenous growth factors as cosmeceuticals. Dermatol Surg 2005; 31(7 pt 2):827–831;
(discussion 831).
71. Fisher GJ, Voorhees JJ. Molecular mechanisms of photoaging and its prevention by retinoic acid:
ultraviolet irradiation induces MAP kinase signal transduction cascades that induce Ap-1-regulated
matrix metalloproteinases that degrade human skin in vivo. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 1998;
3(1):61–68.
72. Kang S, Chung JH, Lee JH, et al. Topical N-acetyl cysteine and genistein prevent ultraviolet-light-
induced signaling that leads to photoaging in human skin in vivo. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):
835–841.
73. Ostler EL, Wallis CV, Aboalchamat B, et al. Telomerase and the cellular lifespan: implications of the
aging process. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2000; 13(suppl 6):1467–1476.
40
Baumann

=== Page 58 ===
5
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties:
The Objective Data
Sarika Saggar, Naissan O. Wesley, Natalie M. Moulton-Levy, and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Clinical differences in dermatologic disorders may be influenced by ethnic variation in skin
properties. Previous investigations by objective methods have provided evidence of ethnic
differences in skin properties, but the data have often been contradictory (1). Although, it
remains difficult to establish clinically applicable ethnic trends, recent investigations have
further emphasized the need for distinct research on disease processes and treatment
responses in ethnic skin when defining appropriate clinical management.
We explore and attempt to clarify recent objective data that have become available in the
context of transepidermal water loss (TEWL), water content (WC) (via conductance,
capacitance, resistance, and impedance), blood vessel reactivity (BVR), pH gradient, micro-
topography, sebaceous function, vellus hair follicle distribution, morphology and distribution
of melanosomes, and resistance to photodamage to differentiate skin properties of different
ethnic groups. In addition, as objective definitions of skin color are yet to be established, we
introduce certain objective differences that have been established to date. We searched
MEDLINE1, MD Consult, Science Citations Index, the Melvyl Catalogue (CDL-Hosted
Database of University of California, San Fransicsco, California, U.S.), and standard
dermatology textbooks from 2002 to August 2006. Keywords in searches included words
pertaining to race (i.e., race, ethnicity, black, African, white, Caucasian, Asian, Hispanic) and
dermatology (i.e., skin, skin physiology, skin function) (1).
TRANSEPIDERMAL WATER LOSS
TEWL is a method of measuring the skin’s barrier function and is currently defined as the
total amount of water vapor loss through the skin and appendages, under nonsweating
conditions (2). Measured in various studies, both at baseline and after topical application of
irritants, it is the most studied objective measure in defining differences between the skin of
different ethnicities (1).
In 1988, Wilson et al. (3) demonstrated higher in vitro TEWL values in black compared
with white cadaver skin matched for age and gender. While Sugino et al. (4) (abstract only)
similarly found in vivo baseline TEWL to be blacks > Caucasians > Hispanics > Asians,
Berardesca et al. (5) found no significant difference in vivo in baseline TEWL between race and
anatomic site for blacks, whites, and Hispanics. Warrier et al. (6) tried to clarify such
discrepancies in data and found TEWL to be significantly lower on the cheeks and legs in
blacks compared with whites. However, on the basis of a study of Caucasian subjects showing
that TEWL values vary by anatomic location, it is difficult to compare differences in TEWL
between the sites examined by Warrier et al. (6) (cheeks and lower legs) to those of other
studies (forearm, inner thigh, and back) (1,3,5,7–10).
Additionally, in vivo studies have observed ethnic variation in TEWL in response to
topical irritants and/or tape stripping. In two earlier studies, Berardesca and Maibach (7,9)
found that blacks showed higher TEWL levels than whites after topical application of sodium
lauryl sulfate (SLS), suggesting an increased susceptibility of blacks to irritation, but found no
significant differences between Hispanic and white skin. Kompaore et al. (10) also showed
significantly higher TEWL values in blacks and Asians compared with whites with topical
methyl nicotinate (MN), before and after tape stripping; TEWL values were highest in Asians
with increased tape stripping. In contrast, Aramaki et al. (11) later found no significant
differences in TEWL between Japanese and German women before or after SLS stress; these

=== Page 59 ===
findings were further supported by another study (unpublished data) (12) on Asian skin that
found no statistically significant differences between Asians and Caucasians before or after
tape stripping.
Comparing TEWL on the basis of degree of skin pigmentation rather than ethnicity,
Reed et al. (13) found that subjects with skin type V/VI required more tape strippings than
skin type II/III to achieve the same TEWL; thus, skin type V/VI had increased barrier strength.
Furthermore, the water barrier function, measured by TEWL, in skin type V/VI was shown to
recover more quickly. Berardesca et al. (14), examining differences in TEWL between women
of skin type I/II and skin type VI, also demonstrated that recovery of water barrier function
was greater in skin type VI, but the difference was not statistically significant. Additionally,
unlike finding by Reed et al. (13), Berardesca et al. (14) found that skin type VI had a higher
TEWL at baseline and after each tape stripping, though TEWL increased for both groups with
each tape stripping.
Recently, additional studies on TEWL have contributed to evidence of ethnic skin
differences. Tagami (15) continued investigation of Asian skin by comparing TEWL between
Japanese and French women under similar environmental conditions. The research team
measured TEWL on cheeks and mid-flexor surface of forearms of all subjects and, similar to
finding by Sugino et al. (4), found that TEWL was lower in Japanese women, but the data were
not statistically significant. Of note, skin type or ethnicities were not specified within the
French group.
Hicks et al. (16) grouped patients on the basis of skin color, as in a study by Reed et al.
(13), while studying the difference between susceptibility of black (skin types V/VI) and white
skin (skin types II/III) to irritant contact dermatitis (ICD). After exposure to 4% SLS, changes in
TEWL and stratum corneum (SC) thickness of the skin on the volar forearm were negatively
correlated in both groups. White participants showed a trend toward greater mean increases in
TEWL after SLS exposure than black participants, supporting the possibility that the barrier
function in black skin is more durable than white skin, but the differences were not statistically
significant. Overall, results from all methods of evaluation suggested reduced susceptibility of
black skin to ICD. However, while there was no significant difference between SC thickness of
control sites in both groups [consistent with the 1974 study by Weigand et al. (17)], the SC
thickness was significantly less in blacks as compared to whites after exposure to 4% SLS at
48 hours. This pattern of SC thinning seems to contradict the findings of reduced susceptibility
of black skin to ICD. A larger sample size may be necessary to clarify this discrepancy and
achieve a statistically significant trend in TEWL changes.
In another evaluation of differences between African-American and white skin, Grimes
et al. (18) did not find significant differences in TEWL in vivo. Methods of evaluation included
clinical evaluation and instrumental measurements of sebum level, pH, moisture content, and
TEWL. Although there were differences in visual assessment of photoaging and hyper-
pigmentation, the baseline instrumental findings from all methods indicated no significant
differences between African-American and white skin. In a subset of subjects participating in a
chemical challenge of 5% SLS, though there was an early significant change in TEWL in white
participants, TEWL was similar in both groups after 24 hours. The overall findings support
the postulation that, objectively, there is little difference between African-American and white
skin. However, again on the basis of small sample size, it is difficult to make definitive
conclusions based on the data.
Pershing et al. (19) found a significant difference in TEWL between Caucasians and
Asians with topical application of capsaicinoids. The study measured TEWL after application
of capsaicinoid analogs at various concentrations on volar forearms. Increasing concentrations
of total capsaicinoid were not associated with a proportional change in TEWL in either
Caucasians or Asians. However, a capsaicinoid concentration of 16 mg/mL produced
statistically less TEWL in Asians than Caucasians ( p < 0.05); specifically, there was an increase
of the mean TEWL in Caucasians but a decrease in Asians. The investigators concluded that
changes in TEWL between Caucasians and Asians with capsaicinoids, but not irritants [e.g.,
SLS in a study by Aramaki et al. (11)], may reflect the effect of vehicle composition (isopropyl
alcohol for capsaicin vs. water for irritants) or other physiologic skin functions (e.g., cutaneous
blood flow) in determining TEWL.
Astner et al. (20) evaluated ethnic variability in skin response to a household irritant
(ivory dishwashing liquid) with graded concentrations of the irritant to the anterior forearms
42
Saggar et al.

=== Page 60 ===
of Caucasian and African-American subjects. The investigators observed significantly higher
mean values for TEWL in Caucasians compared with African-Americans ( p  0.005), as
previously observed in study by Warrier et al. There was a positive, dose-dependent
correlation between TEWL values and irritant concentration in all groups. However, not only
was the mean TEWL higher in Caucasians, but the relative increment of increase in response to
the graded irritant concentrations were also higher in Caucasians when compared with
African-Americans ( p  0.005).
Overall, the data regarding TEWL (recent studies summarized in Table 1) continue to be
inconsistent. Unlike the majority of previous studies, findings by Berardesca et al. (5), Hicks
et al. (16), and Grimes et al. (18) do not support a statistically significant difference in TEWL
between black and Caucasian skin. Most studies have shown a greater TEWL in blacks
compared with whites (3,4,7,10,13,14); however, Warrier et al. (6) and Astner et al. (20) (after
irritant stress) found TEWL to be less in blacks than whites. Additionally, TEWL measure-
ments with regards to Asian skin remain inconclusive as previous studies observed baseline
measurements in Asian skin to be equal to black skin and greater than Caucasian skin (10), less
than all other ethnic groups (4), or no different than other ethnic groups (11,12); while, more
recently, Tagami (15) did not find any statistically significant difference between Asian and
French skin. Also recently, Pershing et al. (19) found an increase in TEWL of Caucasians but a
decrease in TEWL of Asians in response to high-potency capsaicinoids, the results of which are
difficult to categorize. Further clarification of both baseline and post-irritant TEWL in different
ethnic groups will be valuable in determining whether ethnic differences in barrier function
could influence varying susceptibility to dermatologic disorders and response to topical
therapy.
WATER CONTENT
WC or hydration of the skin is measured by skin capacitance, conductance, impedance, or
resistance based on the increased sensitivity of hydrated SC to an electrical field (21). Of note,
possible sources of error or variation in measurement include sweat production, filling of the
sweat gland ducts, the number of hair follicles, and the electrolyte content of the SC (22).
An early study by Johnson and Corah (23) found that blacks had higher levels of skin
resistance at baseline than whites; as a higher resistance indicates a lower WC, these findings
implied black skin as having a lower WC (1). Later, when comparing WC by capacitance before
and after topical SLS, Berardesca and Maibach (7) found no significant differences in WC
between blacks and whites at baseline or after SLS stress. In a similar study comparing
Hispanics and whites, they found a higher WC in Hispanics at baseline, but the difference was
not statistically significant (9). However, a study by Berardesca et al. (5), using conductance,
demonstrated a greater baseline WC in blacks and Hispanics compared with whites on the
dorsal arm and a greater WC in Hispanics than blacks and whites on the volar forearm.
Warrier et al. (6) examined WC by capacitance and found black women to have a
significantly higher WC on the cheeks than white women, but there were no significant
differences at baseline on the forearms and the legs of the two ethnic groups, suggesting that
anatomic location could influence measurements. Manuskiatti et al. (24), also measuring WC of
black and white women by capacitance, found no ethnic differences in WC on nine different
anatomic locations. In contrast, Sugino et al. (4) included Asians in their study and, by
measuring WC with impedance, found that WC was highest in Asians compared with
Caucasians, blacks, and Hispanics.
Recently, Sivamani et al. (25) (study summarized in Table 2) compared differences in
impedance between Caucasian, African-American, Hispanic, and Asian subjects. In addition to
measuring baseline differences, the researchers assessed differences in response to
polyvinylidene chloride occlusion, topical petrolatum, and topical glycerin applied to the
volar forearm. Baseline measurements showed no significant differences in impedance
between age, gender, or ethnicity. Notably, although there were no significant differences
between right and left forearms, significant baseline variation was found between the distal
and proximal volar forearms; the proximal forearms showed lower impedance than the distal
forearms ( p < 0.001). We can infer baseline differences in WC among anatomic sites from this
study [as suggested by findings from Warrier et al. (6)]. Additionally, all interventions showed
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
43

=== Page 61 ===
Table 1
Transepidermal Water Loss (TEWL)a
Study
Technique
Subjects
Site
Results
Tagami (15)
In vivo
Japanese women 120
Cheeks and mid-flexor
. TEWL Japanese < whites but not statistically significant
French women 322
forearm
(ages 20–70 yr, all)
Hicks et al. (16)
In vivo—topical application
White:
Volar forearm
. TEWL Whites > blacks but not statistically significant
of 1% and 4% SLS
Skin type II 6
(irritant)
Skin type III 2
Black:
Skin type V 5
Skin type VI 1
(ages 18–40 yr, all)
Grimes et al. (18)
In vivo—topical application
African-American 18
Inner forearm
. Baseline: No significant difference
of 5% SLS (irritant)
White 19
. After SLS stress: immediate increase in TEWL of white
(ages 35–65 yr, women, all)
subjects, but increase no longer evident after 24 hr and found
African-American 3
to be similar to African-Americans (not statistically significant)
White 5
Pershing et al. (19)
In vivo—topical application
Caucasians:
Volar forearm
. Increasing concentrations of total capsaicinoid not associated
of capsaicinoid analogs
Male 3
Female 3
Asians:
with proportional change in TEWL, in all subjects
. Capsaicinoid concentration of 16 mg/mL produced : mean
TEWL in Caucasians, ; mean TEWL in Asians ( p < 0.05)
Male 3
Female 3
(ages 19–63 yr, all)
Astner et al. (20)
In vivo—topical application
Caucasians 15
Anterior forearm
. Positive dose-dependent correlation between TEWL and
of ivory soap (irritant)
(Skin type II/III)
African-Americans 15
(Skin type V/VI)
[ages 18–49 yr, all]
irritant concentration: Mean TEWL Caucasians > African-
Americans ( p  0.005)
. Relative increment of increase in TEWL after irritant:
Caucasians > African-Americans ( p  0.005)
aAll of the evidence supports TEWL blacks > whites, except for studies by Berardesca et al. (5), Hicks et al. (16), and Grimes et al. (18), which found no significant
difference, and Warrier et al. (6) and Astner et al. (20), which found blacks < whites. TEWL measurements of Asian skin are inconclusive, as they have been found to be
equal to black skin and greater than Caucasian skin [Kompaore et al. (10)], equal to Caucasian skin [Aramaki et al. (11), and Tagami (15)], and less than all other ethnic
groups [Sugino et al. (4)]. Pershing et al. (19) found an increase in TEWL of Caucasians but a decrease in TEWL of Asians in response to high concentrations of topical
capsaicinoids.
Abbreviations: SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate; yr, years.
44
Saggar et al.

=== Page 62 ===
decreases in impedance from baseline (degree of decrease varied by intervention), but no
significant differences between age, gender, or ethnicity. The authors concluded that there is
little variation in volar forearm skin across gender, age, and ethnicity, providing an adequate
site for testing of skin and cosmetic products.
Grimes et al. (18) (study summarized in Table 2) measured baseline moisture content on
the inner forearms of African-American and white women on the basis of capacitance. Similar
to study by Sivamani et al. (25), this study found no significant variation in baseline moisture
content between African-American and white subject inner forearms.
The findings by Johnson and Corah (23) implied ethnic variance in WC. However, the SLS-
induced irritation studies by Berardesca and Maibach (7,9) revealed no significant differences in
WC between the races at baseline or after SLS stress, and Manuskiatti et al. (24) found no
baseline difference in WC between blacks and whites. Berardesca et al. (5), Warrier et al. (6), and
Sugino et al. (4) later demonstrated ethnic variability in WC, but the values varied by anatomic
site. In contrast, Sivamani et al. (25) and Grimes et al. (18) recently reported no significant ethnic
variation in WC, baseline and after various topical interventions, further supporting studies by
Berardesca and Maibach (7,9) and Manuskiatti et al. (24). Sivamani et al. (25) also demonstrated
variation of WC between different anatomic sites and with specific interventions. Of note,
impedance, as used in the studies by Sugino et al. (4) and Sivamani et al. (25), is less widely used
than capacitance and conductance and has been shown to be more sensitive to environmental
and technical factors that affect the SC (21); this makes it difficult to compare the results
presented by these latter two studies to other studies.
BLOOD VESSEL REACTIVITY
Measurements of cutaneous blood flow facilitate the objective evaluation of skin physiology,
pathology, irritation, and response to treatment (26). Objective techniques for the estimation of
blood flow include laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) and photoplethysmography (PPG). LDV
is a noninvasive method based on measurement of the Doppler frequency shift in
monochromatic laser light backscattered from moving red blood cells (26,27). PPG works by
recording the backscattered radiation of infrared light that is not absorbed by hemoglobin as a
measure of the amount of hemoglobin in the skin (26).
In 1985, Guy et al. (28) used both techniques to study the response to topical MN in
healthy black and white subjects and observed a similarity in BVR. However, Gean et al. (29),
also using different concentrations of topical MN while measuring LDV, observed that blacks
Table 2
Water Contenta
Study
Technique
Subjects
Site
Results
Sivamani
et al. (25)
In vivo—impedance,
topical application
of petrolatum and
glycerin
White 22
African-American 14
Hispanic 14
Asian 9
(ages 18–60 yr, all)
Volar forearm
. Baseline: no significant
differences in electrical
impedance between age,
gender, or ethnicity;
impedance of proximal
< distal forearm ( p < 0.001)
. After topical interventions:
all interventions produced
decrease in impedance;
degree of decrease varied
by intervention. No significant
differences between age,
gender, or ethnicity.
Grimes
et al. (18)
In vivo—capacitance
African-American 18
White 19
(ages 35–65 yr,
women, all)
Inner forearm
. Baseline: African-Americans <
whites, but not statistically
significant
aEthnic differences in water content, as measured by resistance, capacitance, conductance, and impedance
are inconclusive.
Abbreviations: mo, months; SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate; yr, years.
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
45

=== Page 63 ===
had a greater BVR to all concentrations and Asians had a greater BVR to higher doses in
comparison with Caucasians.
Berardesca and Maibach (7,9) later found no significant differences in LDV between
black and white skin or between Hispanic and white skin, at baseline or after topical SLS.
However, a subsequent study by Berardesca and Maibach (30) measured LDV in response to
corticosteroid application, finding a decrease in BVR of blacks compared with whites.
Kompaore et al. (10) added a different element of physical stress by evaluating LDV
before and after tape stripping in black, Caucasian, and Asian subjects. After application of
MN, but before tape stripping, there was no difference between the groups in basal perfusion
flow, but lag time before vasodilatation was greater in blacks (decreased BVR) and less in
Asians (increased BVR) compared with Caucasians. After 8 and 12 tape strips, though BVR
increased in all three groups, it increased significantly more in Asians. This response in BVR to
tape stripping confirmed the importance of the SC in barrier function. Aramaki et al. (11) also
examined Asian skin, but found no difference in LDV at baseline or after SLS-induced
irritation between Japanese and German women.
Recently, an investigation done by Hicks et al. (16) demonstrated no significant difference
in BVR, measured by LDV, between black and white participants with topical SLS. The results
obtained are in conflict with several previous studies that have suggested differences between
black and white skin (10,28–30). However, the investigators expressed doubt in the validity of
the LDV measurements because of technical difficulties in using the flowmeter.
The results of the recent study on BVR are summarized in Table 3. Since studies on BVR
have administered different vasoactive substances, they cannot be objectively compared (1,31).
Additionally, measurements may differ according to anatomic sites and, as noted by Hicks
et al. (16), it has been previously reported that small changes in position of the measuring
probe can produce significant changes in measurements and may result in decreased reliability
of results.
MICROTOPOGRAPHY
Skin microrelief reflects the three-dimensional organization of the deeper layers and functional
status of the skin (32). Research has been performed relating changes in skin microtopography
to age and, more recently, relating changes to ethnic origin (Table 3). Guehenneux et al. (32)
studied changes in microrelief with age in Caucasian and Japanese women, simultaneously
during winter in Paris and Sendai. Both Caucasian and Japanese women showed an increase in
the density of lines measuring >60 mm in depth and a decrease in the density of lines
measuring <60 mm with increasing age. However, this change was found to be more
pronounced and occur at a younger age in Caucasian women. In addition, although no
changes in orientation of lines with age were found in Japanese women, changes correlating
with an increase in skin anisotropy with age were found in Caucasian women. Note, it is
difficult to assess the reliability of ethnic comparison in this study as the subjects were studied
in two distinct geographical locations where environmental exposures may differ.
Diridollou et al. (33) compared skin topography among women of African-American,
Caucasian, Asian, and Hispanic descent. Skin microrelief of the dorsal and ventral forearms
was investigated in terms of the density of line intersections, in which a higher density of the
intersection indicated smoother skin, and line orientation, in which a smaller angle difference
between the two main directions of the lines indicated higher anisotropy. On the ventral
forearms, the data supported the fact that the roughness and anisotropy of the skin increased
with age in all four ethnic groups; the density of intersection decreased, and angle between
lines of different orientation became smaller. The same results were produced by the dorsal
forearms, a sun-exposed site, but changes were significantly less pronounced for the African-
American subjects, indicating a possible resistance to photoaging in this group. Overall, the
density of the intersections was less for Caucasians and Hispanics than for Asians and African-
Americans. In addition, the anisotropy was higher for Caucasians than for Hispanics or
Asians, and significantly higher than African-Americans.
Diridollou et al. (33) concluded that roughness and anisotropy are more pronounced in
Caucasian skin than in Hispanic, Asian, and African-American skin. Guehenneux et al. (32)
also found more pronounced changes of topography and higher anisotropy in Caucasian skin
46
Saggar et al.

=== Page 64 ===
Table 3
Study
Technique
Subjects
Site
Results
a. Blood vessel reactivitya
Hicks et al. (16)
Topically administered SLS
(irritant); LDV
White 7
Black 6
(ages 18–40 yr, all)
Volar forearm
. SLS stress: no significant difference in LDV response
between groups
b. Microtopographyb
Guehenneux et al. (32)
In vivo—skin replicas
and interferometry
Caucasian 356
Japanese 120
(ages 20–80 yr, women, all)
Volar forearm
. : in the density of lines > 60 mm and ; in the density of lines
< 60 mm in depth with increasing age in both; change in
Caucasians > Japanese and at earlier age in Caucasians.
. Anisotropy: : with age in Caucasians, no change in Japanese
Diridollou et al. (33)
In vivo–SkinChip
310 women (ages 18–61 yr, all;
African-American, Caucasian,
Asian, Hispanic)
Dorsal and ventral
forearms
. Roughness and anisotropy : with age on both dorsal and
ventral forearms in all groups; Caucasians > Hispanic and
Asians and African-Americans.
. Density of the line intersections: Caucasians and Hispanics
< Asians and African-Americans.
c. pH gradientc
Grimes et al. (18)
African-American 18
Above left eyebrow
. Baseline: African-Americans < whites, but not statistically
White 19
significant
(ages 35–65 yr, women, all)
d. Sebaceous functiond
Aramaki et al. (11)
In vivo—sebumeter; topical
Japanese women 22
Forearm
. Baseline sebum levels: Japanese < whites ( p < 0.05)
application of SLS (irritant)
(mean age 25.84 yr)
. After SLS stress: Japanese > whites ( p < 0.05)
German women 22
(mean age 26.94 yr)
Grimes et al. (18)
In vivo—sebumeter
African-American 18
Forehead
. Baseline sebum levels: African-Americans < whites, but
White 19
not statistically significant
(ages 35–65 yr, women, all)
De Rigal et al. (35)
In vivo—sebumeter;
sebutape
387 women (ages 18–70 yr, all;
African-American, Hispanic,
Caucasian, Chinese)
Forehead and
cheeks
. Mean sebum excretion rate: same across all ethnic
groups.
. Number of sebaceous glands: Chinese and Hispanics
< Caucasians and African-Americans.
. Sebum level decrease with age: linear in Chinese; sudden
; around age 50 yr for other 3 groups.
(Continued )
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
47

=== Page 65 ===
Table 3
(Continued )
Study
Technique
Subjects
Site
Results
e. Vellus hair folliclese
Mangelsdorf et al. (36)
In vivo—skin surface
biopsies
Asian 10
African-American 10
Forehead, back,
thorax, upper arm,
. Distribution of follicle density for different body sites same in
all groups: highest on forehead, lowest on calf.
(ages 25–50 yr, males, all)
forearm, thigh, calf . Follicle density on forehead: Caucasians > African-
Americans > Asians ( p < 0.01); no significant differences on
other sites.
. Calf and thigh: Asians and African-Americans—smaller
values for volume ( p < 0.01, both), potential penetration
surface ( p < 0.01, both), follicular orifice ( p < 0.01 and
p < 0.05, respectively), and hair shaft diameter ( p < 0.01, both).
[results compared to Caucasians studied in Otberg et al. (37)]
aEach study, except for the study by Berardesca and Maibach (30) comparing Hispanics and whites, Aramaki et al. (11) comparing Japanese and German women, and
Hicks et al. (16) comparing blacks and whites, reveals some degree of ethnic variation in blood vessel reactivity.
bDifficult to compare two studies because of different techniques. However, both studies demonstrate an increase in anisotropy with age in Caucasians.
cEvidence supports that pH of black skin is less than white skin. However, Berardesca et al. (14) demonstrate this difference after superficial tape stripping of the volar
forearm, but not at baseline; while Warrier et al. (6) demonstrate the difference at baseline on the cheeks but not on the legs; and the results from Grimes et al. (18) did not
reach statistical significance.
dEthnic differences in sebaceous function are inconclusive.
eUnable to draw conclusions regarding ethnic differences in vellus hair follicle distribution and morphology because of insufficient evidence.
Abbreviations: EM, electron microscopy; LDV, laser Doppler velocimetry; PLS, parallel-linear striations; SC, stratum corneum; SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate; yr, years.
48
Saggar et al.

=== Page 66 ===
as compared with Asian skin, and at an earlier age. However, the results of both studies cannot
be compared or integrated as they used different tools of investigation and different evaluation
parameters.
pH Gradient
Ethnic differences in pH of the skin have also been investigated to evaluate variation in skin
physiology. In examining differences in pH between Caucasian (skin types I/II) and African-
American (skin type VI) women at baseline and after tape strippings, Berardesca et al. (16)
found no significant differences at baseline. After tape stripping, the pH in both ethnic groups
decreased with more tape strippings. However, they found a significantly lower pH in blacks
compared with whites in the superficial layers of the SC, but not in the deeper layers. Warrier
et al. (6) also found a lower pH on the cheeks and legs of blacks compared with whites, but the
pH difference on the legs did not reach statistical significance.
Since these earlier studies, similar results were produced in the study by Grimes et al.
(18). The skin pH, measured above the left eyebrow, was found to be lower in African-
American women than white women, but the results did not reach statistical significance.
Thus, the skin pH has been found to be lower in blacks compared with whites in three
different studies, but in different anatomic locations and with varying statistical significance. It
can be implied from these studies that there may be some difference between whites and
blacks in SC pH, but the the confounding factors remain to be explored (Table 3) (1).
SEBACEOUS FUNCTION
Sebum is a semisolid secreted onto the skin surface by glands attached to the hair follicle by a
duct (34). The functions of sebum include protection from friction, reduction of water loss, and
protection from infection. Sebum levels have been confirmed to decline with age; however,
there are few studies on the effect of race on baseline sebum secretion. Grimes et al. (18) used a
sebumeter to measure sebum levels on the foreheads of African-American and white women.
The results showed lower levels of sebum on African-American skin than on white skin, but
differences were not statistically significant.
A study by de Rigal et al. (35) investigated the sebaceous function of women of African-
American, Hispanic, Caucasian, or Chinese descents. Measurements were performed using a
sebumeter and sebutape on the forehead and cheeks to compare sebum excretion rate and
number of sebaceous glands according to ethnicity and age. The mean gland excretion was the
same across ethnic groups. However, the number of sebaceous glands was lower in Chinese
and Hispanic groups as compared with Caucasian and African-American groups. In addition,
the pattern of normal sebum decreased with age differed in each population; the decrease was
linear in the Chinese group, but the other three groups exhibited a sudden decrease around
age 50 years.
Aramaki et al. (11) assessed sebum secretion as a part of their study investigating skin
reaction to SLS at concentrations of 0.25% and 0.5%. Before and after application of SLS to the
forearms of each subject, sebum levels were determined by a sebumeter. The baseline sebum
levels were lower in Japanese women than in white women. However, after SLS 0.25% and
0.5% application, sebum levels were higher in the Japanese women ( p < 0.05).
The latter two studies suggest that significant differences exists between sebum levels
according to ethnicity. The de Rigal et al. (35) study found that although the mean sebum
excretion was the same across ethnic groups, the number of sebaceous glands and the normal
sebum decrease with age varied between groups. This may indicate a difference in distribution
of sebum independent of sebum levels among ethnic groups. Aramaki et al. (11) determined
sebum levels to be lower in Japanese women as compared with white women at baseline, but
Japanese women expressed an increase in sebum levels in response to irritant stress. This
irritant response may represent a physiologic attempt to increase barrier defense. Further
studies will be useful to elucidate whether differences in barrier defense between ethnic
groups are based on varying baseline sebum levels or varying sebaceous response to physical
stress (Table 3).
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
49

=== Page 67 ===
VELLUS HAIR FOLLICLES
As follicular morphology and distribution may affect penetration of topical medications and
consequent treatment response, Mangelsdorf et al. (36) investigated vellus hair follicle size and
distribution in Asians and African-Americans as compared to whites (Table 3). Skin surface
biopsies were taken from seven body sites of Asians and African-Americans, with body sites
matched to locations described by Otberg et al. (37) in their study on Caucasians. In comparing
the results of the three ethnic groups, the distribution of follicle density at different body sites
was the same; the highest average density was on the forehead and the lowest on the calf for all
groups. However, follicular density on the forehead was significantly lower in Asians and
African-Americans ( p < 0.001). The Asians and African-Americans also exhibited smaller
values for potential pentration surface ( p < 0.01, both groups), follicular orifice ( p < 0.01 and
p < 0.05, respectively), and hair shaft diameter ( p < 0.01, both groups) on the thigh and calf
regions. The authors concluded that the significant ethnic differences in follicle structure and
pattern of distribution, especially in calf and forehead regions, emphasize the need for skin
absorption experiments on different skin types to develop effective skin treatments.
MELANOSOMES
Ethnic differences in number of melanocytes, number of melanosomes, and morphology of
melanosomes has been of great interest in working toward the development of objective
definitions of skin color (Table 4). The biosynthesis of melanin, a cutaneous pigment, occurs in
a melanosome, a metabolic unit within the melanocyte; melanosomes are then transported via
melanocyte dendrites to adjacent keratinocytes (38).
In 1969, Szabo et al. (39) examined Caucasoids, American-Indians, Mongoloids (from
Japan and China), and Negroids to observe melanosome groupings. The melanosomes in
keratinocytes of Caucasoids and Mongoloids were found to be grouped together with a
surrounding membrane. In contrast, the Negroid keratinocytes showed numerous melano-
somes, longer and wider than in other racial groups, and mostly individually dispersed.
Additionally, they observed an increase in melanosomes of keratinocytes of all races after
irradiation, with grouping of melanosomes maintained in Caucasoids and Mongoloids. The
authors concluded that individually dispersed melanosomes give a more uniform and dense
color than the grouping found in fair skin.
In 1973, Konrad et al. (40) studied melanosome distribution patterns in hyperpigmented
white skin alone and found that when comparing hyperpigmented lesions to control areas,
there were no uniform differences in the distribution patterns of melanosomes. In addition, the
degree of clinical hyperpigementation was not associated with specific distribution patterns.
However, they did note an important relationship between melanosome size and distribution:
the percentage of melanosomes dispersed singly increased with increasing melanosome size.
The authors also reported findings with experimental pigment donation, showing that large
melanosomes are taken up individually by keratinocytes and dispersed singly within their
cytoplasm, while small melanosomes are incorporated and maintained as aggregates. These
data suggested melanosome size differences as the basis for skin color differences.
More recently, Thong et al. (41) quantified variation in melanosome size and distribution
pattern on volar forearms of Asian (phototypes IV/V), Caucasian (phototype II), and African-
American (phototype VI) skin. The proportions of individual and clustered melanosomes were
compared for each ethnic group and showed statistically significant differences ( p < 0.05).
Melanosomes in Caucasian skin were distributed as 15.5% individual versus 84.5% clustered.
Meanwhile, in African-Americans, the melanosomes were distributed as 88.9% individual
versus 11.1% clustered. The Asian melanosome distribution was intermediate between the
latter two groups, as 62.6% individual versus 37.4% clustered. The investigators also
determined the mean  standard deviation (SD) size of melanosomes distributed individually
to be larger in comparison with those distributed in clusters for each ethnic group. The mean 
SD of random melanosomes in each group differed as African-American skin showed
significantly larger melanosome size than Caucasian skin, and Asian skin showed melanosome
size as intermediate between the two other groups. Thus, there was a trend of progressive
increase in melanosome size when moving from Caucasian to African-American skin that
50
Saggar et al.

=== Page 68 ===
Table 4
Melanosomesa
Study
Technique
Subjects
Site
Results
Szabo et al. (39)
In vivo—EM
Caucasoid 5
Not reported
. Caucasoids and Mongoloids: grouped melanosomes
American-Indian 6
. Negroids: longer and wider melanosomes, predominantly individually
Mongoloid 3
dispersed.
Negroid 7
(age not reported)
Alaluf et al. (42)
In vivo—EM; alkali
solubility of melanin
European 10
Chinese 8
Mexican 10
Dorsal forearm and
volar upper arm
. Average melanosome size: dorsal forearm > volar upper arm, in all
ethnic groups ( p < 0.001); African > Indian > Mexican > Chinese >
European
Indian 10
. Melanosome size ~ total melanin content ( p < 0.0001)
African 10
. Light melanin fraction: African < (Mexican and Chinese) < Indian <
European
. Dark melanin fraction: African and Indian > (Mexican and Chinese) >
European
. Total amount of melanin: African and Indian > Mexican and Chinese
and European ( p < 0.001)
Thong et al. (41)
In vivo—EM
Chinese 15
(Skin type IV/V, ages
Volar forearm
. Proportion of individually distributed to clustered melanosomes:
African-Americans > Asians > Caucasians ( p < 0.05)
10–73 yr)
Caucasian 3
. Mean  SD size of melanosomes distributed individually > clustered,
in all ethnic groups.
(Skin type II, ages
22–49 yr)
. Mean  SD size of random melanosomes: African-Americans >
Asians > Caucasians ( p < 0.05)
African-American 3
(Skin type VI, ages
18–52 yr)
aDarker skin has more individually dispersed melanosomes in comparison with lighter skin; individually dispersed melanosomes tend to be larger in size than clustered
melanosomes.
Abbreviations: EM, electron micrograph; SD, standard deviation; yr, years.
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
51

=== Page 69 ===
corresponded with the progression from clustered to predominantly individual melanosome
distribution. In addition, degradation patterns of melanosomes in the upper levels of
epidermis varied by ethnic group. As keratinocytes became terminally differentiated and
migrated to the SC, melanosomes were completely degraded and absent in the SC of light skin,
while intact melanosomes could be seen in the SC of dark skin. Asian skin showed an
intermediate pattern where few melanosomes remained in the corneocytes; interestingly, the
remaining melanosomes were predominantly individual, indicating that clustered melano-
somes may be degraded more efficiently during this process.
Alaluf et al. (42) examined the morphology, size, and melanin content of melanosomes
on the volar upper arms and dorsal forearms of European, Chinese, Mexican, Indian, and
African subjects living in South Africa. The melanosome size of dorsal forearm (photoexposed)
skin was observed as approximately 1.1 times larger than melanosome size of volar upper arm
(photoprotected) skin ( p < 0.001) when data were pooled from all ethnic groups; each ethnic
group separately showed a similar trend, but lacked statistical significance. In addition, a
progressive and statistically significant increase in average melanosome size was observed
when moving from European (light) to African (dark) skin types. The melanosome size was
directly correlated with total melanin content in the epidermis of all subjects ( p < 0.0001).
When comparing the epidermal melanin content among ethnic groups, the investigators found
a downward trend in the amount of alkali-soluble melanin (light-colored pheomelanin and
DHICA-enriched eumelanin) in epidermis as the skin type became progressively darker;
African skin contained the lowest amount ( p < 0.02). Indian skin presented an exception to this
trend with higher concentrations of light melanin fractions than both Mexican and Chinese
skin ( p < 0.05). However, both African and Indian skin showed about two times more of the
alkali insoluble melanin (dark-colored DHI-enriched eumelanins) than the Mexican, Chinese,
and European skin types ( p < 0.001). Overall, the melanin composition showed a trend toward
higher fractions of alkali-soluble melanins while moving from darker (African) skin to lighter
(European) skin. In addition, African and Indian skin revealed the highest total amount of
melanin ( p < 0.001) and did not differ significantly from each other.
Despite the data showing differences in number and distribution of melanosomes, recent
studies find no evidence of differences in numbers of melanocytes among ethnic groups (38). For
example, Alaluf et al. (43) found no significant difference in melanocyte number between
African, Indian, Mexican, or Chinese skin types using immunohistochemical methods. They
did consistently find 60% to 80% more melanocytes in European skin than all other skin types
(p < 0.01), but the authors felt a larger sample size would be necessary to confirm this observation.
Tadokoro et al. (44) also found approximately equal densities of melanocytes in unirradiated skin
of Asian, black, and white subjects ranging from 12.2 to 12.8 melanocytes per mm.
Thus, it is generally accepted that differences in skin color are supported more by
differences in melanosome distribution, size, and content rather than melanocyte number.
Szabo et al. (39) observed larger and more individually dispersed melanosomes in Negroid
keratinocytes and concluded that individually dispersed melanosomes may contribute to a
more dense skin color. Konrad et al. (40) further noted that the number of singly dispersed
melanosomes increased as melanosome size increased. Thong et al. (41) quantified the ethnic
differences in melanosome size and distribution, finding a gradient in relative proportion of
individual versus clustered melanosomes that corresponded with size of melanosomses. At
one extreme, African-American skin showed larger melanosomes that were predominantly
individually dispersed; and with Asian skin displaying intermediate results, Caucasian skin
was at the other extreme, showing smaller melanosomes that were predominantly clustered.
Alaluf et al. (42) also revealed a progressive increase in melanosome size as ethnic skin went
from lighter to darker. Furthermore, dark skin contained more total melanin and a larger
fraction of DHI-enriched (dark colored) eumelanin than light skin.
ANTIMICROBIAL PROPERTIES
In 2001, Mackintosh (45) reviewed evidence discussing the role of melanization of skin in the
innate immune defense system. He reported that a major function of melanocytes,
melanosomes, and melanin in skin is to inhibit the proliferation of bacterial, fungal, and
other parasitic infections in the dermis and epidermis. Numerous studies are cited showing
52
Saggar et al.

=== Page 70 ===
evidence that melanocytes and melanosomes exhibit antimicrobial activity and are regulated
by known mediators of inflammatory response. The review aims to support the hypothesis
that immunity and melanization are genetically and functionally linked. The author notes that
previous reports have implied a reduced susceptibility of dark-skinned individuals to skin
disease. In addition, it is postulated that the evolution of black skin could represent high
pressures from infection, especially in tropical regions. In five out of six recent investigations,
people of African descent have been shown to be less susceptible to scabies, fungal
dermatophytosis, cutaneous Candida albicans infections, and bacterial pyodermas than
whites. Additionally, although Rebora and Guarrera (46) demonstrated increased skin
microflora in blacks, they found that the severity of dermatitis in black subjects was
significantly less ( p < 0.01), suggesting the possibility of increased barrier defense. This
evidence may explain that the existence of melanocytes and melanization in different parts of
the body is independent of sun exposure, as in the genitalia, as well as the latitudinal gradient
in skin melanization. The presented evolutionary data are compelling and indicates a necessity
for controlled studies to clarify whether the number of melanocytes, size of melanosomes, or
type of melanin can affect the antimicrobial properties of skin.
PHOTODAMAGE
Although there is evidence for objective differences in skin color, it remains unclear what role
these differences in melanin and melanosomes play in dermatologic disorders. Section IX
(“Ethics and Regulations”) of this article introduced the potential role of melanosomes in
antimicrobial defense. The most extensively studied function of darker skin color, however,
has been in resistance to photodamage from UV radiation. End effects of photodamage include
skin cancer, which are well documented as affecting lighter-skinned individuals more than
those with darker skin.
In determining a relationship between melanosome groupings and sun exposure, studies
have observed that dark-skinned whites, when exposed to sunlight, have nonaggregated
melanosomes, in contrast to light-skinned, unexposed whites who have aggregated
melanosomes. Similarly, there are predominantly nonaggregated melanosomes in sunlight-
exposed Asian skin, and primarily aggregated melanosomes in unexposed Asian skin (38,47).
Alaluf et al. (42) noted an increase in melanosome size in photoexposed skin versus
photoprotected skin in all ethnic groups; the melanosome size was directly correlated with
epidermal melanin content, suggesting increased melanogenesis in photoexposed areas. Van
Nieuwpoort et al. (48) demonstrated that with increased melanogenesis, light-skin
melanosomes showed elongation and reduction in width with no significant change in
surface area, while dark-skin melanosomes enlarged in both length and width with an increase
in volume. On the basis of these data, although all skin types show an increase in epidermal
melanin with sun exposure, both distribution and morphology may influence unequal filtering
between light- and dark-skin types.
In another study, Rijken et al. (49) investigated response to solar-simulating radiation
(SSR) among white (phototype I–III) and black skin (phototype VI). In each white volunteer,
SSR caused DNA damage in epidermal and dermal cells, an influx of neutrophils, active
photoaging-associated proteoytic enzymes, and keratinocyte activation. Also, some white
volunteers showed IL-10-producing neutrophils in the epidermis; IL-10-producing cells have
been postulated to be involved in skin carcinogenesis. In black-skinned individuals, aside from
DNA damage in the suprabasal epidermis, there were no other changes found; basal
keratinocytes and dermal cells were not damaged. The authors concluded that these results
were best explained by difference in skin pigmentation and that melanin functions as a barrier
to protect basal keratinocytes and the dermis from photodamage.
Other studies have suggested that filter properties of melanin alone do not provide
sufficient protection against DNA damage in underlying cells. Tadokoro et al. (50) investigated
the relationship between melanin and DNA damage after UV exposure in subjects of five
ethnic origins (black, white, Asian, others not specified), Fitzpatrick phototypes I through VI.
They found measurable damage to DNA in all groups, and DNA damage was maximal
immediately after irradiation, gradually returning to baseline over time. The immediate DNA
damage levels were higher in whites and Asians in comparison with blacks and Hispanics. In
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
53

=== Page 71 ===
addition, the whites and Asians showed lower constitutive levels of melanin content.
However, the kinetics of DNA damage removal differed among individual subjects, showing
no association between melanin content or ethnic group and DNA repair rates. The authors
noted that though melanin affords significant protection against initial DNA damage, other
properties of melanin, such as antioxidant properties and radical scavenging properties, may
play roles in minimizing the ultimate level of UV damage. Ethnic differences in expression of
receptors involved in melanosome uptake and melanocyte-specific proteins, both before and
after UV exposure, are also being investigated.
The studies by Rijken et al. (49) and Tadokoro et al. (50) indicate that differences in
patterns and kinetics of DNA damage in response to UV radiation exist between ethnic groups.
Additionally, there is evidence of differences between photoexposed skin and photoprotected
skin in melanosome aggregation patterns, melanosome size, melanosome shape, and
melanogenesis (38,42,47,48); it is yet unclear how these results relate to differences in
melanization and resistance to photodamage between ethnic groups.
CONCLUSION
The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that the population is composed of 12.1% black or African-
American, 13.9% Hispanic, or Latino, and 11.9% other nonwhites (51). It has been predicted
that people with colored skin will constitute a majority of the United States and international
populations in the 21st century (52). In light of these statistics, objective investigation of
relationships between ethnicity and differences in structure and function of skin becomes
important for developing appropriate treatment protocols. The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) currently recommends inclusion of more ethnic groups in dermatologic trials, citing
evidence that physiologic differences in skin structure between races can result in varying
efficacies of dermatologic and topical treatments (53). However, data on ethnic differences in
skin, physiology, and function are few; the studies that do exist consist of typically small
patient populations. Consequently, few definitive conclusions can be made.
Notably, it is sometimes difficult to interpret studies on ethnic differences as each study
may use different definitions of race or ethnicity. Race seems to emcompass genetic variations on
the basis of natural selection, which include, but are not limited to, pigmentation (53);
pigmentation appears to be based mainly on erythema, melanin, and the skin’s response to
physiologic insult. Anthropologists divide racial groups into Caucasoid (e.g., Europeans, Arabs,
Indians), Mongoloid (e.g., Asians), Australoid (e.g., Australian aborigines), Congoid or Negroid
(e.g., most African tribes and descendants), and Capoid (e.g., the Kung San African tribe) with
the idea that racial variations were selected to facilitate adaptations to a particular environment
(54). Some reject the relevence of any genetic basis for race, stating that 90% to 95% of genetic
variation occurs within geographic populations rather than across racial groups (53).
Ethnicity, on the other hand, is a more general term, defined as how one sees oneself and
how one is seen by others as part of a group on the basis of presumed ancestry and sharing a
common destiny, often with commonalities in skin color, religion, language, customs, ancestry,
and/or occupation or region (54). Thus, ethnicity overlaps with race but also depends on more
subjective and cultural factors, while race seems to encompass genetic variations based on
natural selection (1). Nevertheless, studies have been able to show differences on the basis of
various ethnic categorizations.
On the basis of the data collected during our review, there exists reasonable evidence
(Table 5) to support that black skin has a higher TEWL, variable BVR, lower skin surface pH,
and larger melanosomes with more individual distribution when compared with white skin by
means of objective measurements; the role of differences in melanization in the antimicrobial
properties of skin and resistance to photodamage remain uncertain. Although some
deductions have been made about Asian and Hispanic skin, the results are contradictory,
and further evaluation is necessary (1). Ethnic differences in WC remain inconclusive as the
prior data are contradictory and recent data have not shown statistically significant
differences. Differences in sebaceous function, although statistically significant, are inconclu-
sive. In addition, there is insufficient evidence at this time to draw any conclusions about
differences in microtopography and follicular morphology and distribution.
54
Saggar et al.

=== Page 72 ===
Objective data on differences in skin properties between ethnic groups not only
emphasize the value of investigation of disease processes and treatment responses in ethnic
skin but also highlight the growing list of physiogic variables involved. Future studies could be
strengthened by detailing definitions of how subjects are designated to a particular race or
ethnic group in addition to skin phototype and would enable more reliable comparisons of
results from different studies.
REFERENCES
1. Wesley NO, Maibach HI. Racial (ethnic) differences in skin properties: the objective data. Am J Clin
Dermatol 2003; 4(12):843–860.
2. Rothman S. Insensible water loss. In: Physiology and Biochemistry of the Skin. Chicago: The
University Chicago Press, 1954:233.
3. Wilson D, Berardesca E, Maibach HI. In vitro transepidermal water loss: differences between Black
and white human skin. Br J Dermatol 1988; 199:647–652.
4. Sugino K, Imokawa G, Maibach HI. Ethnic difference of stratum corneum lipid in relation to stratum
corneum function [abstract]. J Invest Dermatol 1993, 100(4):587.
5. Berardesca E, Rigal J, Leveque JL, et al. In vivo biophysical characterization of skin physiological
differences in races. Dermatologica 1991; 182:89–93.
6. Warrier AG, Kligman AM, Harper RA, et al. A comparison of Black and white skin using noninvasive
methods. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1996; 47:229–240.
7. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Racial differences in sodium lauryl sulfate induced cutaneous irritation:
black and white. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 18:65–70.
8. Rougier A, Lotte C, Corcuff P, et al. Relationship between skin permeability and corneocyte size
according to anatomic site, age, and sex in man. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1988; 39:15–26.
9. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Sodium lauryl sulfate-induced cutaneous irritation: comparison of white
and Hispanic subjects. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 18:136–140.
10. Kompaore F, Marly JP, Dupont C. In vivo evaluation of the stratum corneum barrier function in
Blacks, Caucasians, and Asians with two noninvasive methods. Skin Pharmacol 1993; 6(3):200–207.
11. Aramaki J, Kawana S, Effendy I, et al. Differences of skin irritation between Japanese and European
women. Br J Dermatol 2002; 146:1052–1056.
12. Yosipovitch G, Theng CTS. Asian skin: its architecture, function, and differences from Caucasian skin.
Cosmet Toiletr 2002; 117(9):57–62.
13. Reed JT, Ghadially R, Elias PM. Skin type, but neither race nor gender, influence epidermal
permeability function. Arch Dermatol 1995; 131(10):1134–1138.
14. Berardesca E, Pirot F, Singh M, et al. Differences in stratum corneum pH gradient when comparing
white Caucasian and Black African-American skin. Br J Dermatol 1998; 139:855–857.
15. Tagami H. Racial differences on skin barrier function. Cutis 2002; 70(6 suppl):6–7; (discussion 21–23).
16. Hicks, S, Swindells, J, Middelkamp, M, et al. Confocal histopathology of irritant contact dermatitis in
vivo and the impact of skin color (black vs. white). J. Am Acad Dermatol 2003; 48(5).
17. Weigand DA, Haygood C, Gaylor JR. Cell layers and density of Negro and Caucasian stratum
corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1974; 62:563–568.
18. Grimes P, Edison BL, Green BA, et al. Evaluation of inherent differences between African-American
and white skin surface properties using subjective and objective measures. Cutis 2004; 73(6):392–396.
Table 5
Summary
Evidence supports
Insufficient evidence for
Inconclusive
. TEWL black > white skin
. Variable ethnic blood vessel reactivity
. Deductions regarding
Asian and Hispanic skin
Ethnic differences in:
. Water content
. pH black < white skin
Ethnic differences in:a
. Sebaceous function
. Darker skin has more individually dispersed
. Microtopography
melanosomes; individually dispersed melanosomes
larger than clustered melanosomes.
. Vellus hair follicle
morphology/distribution
aMicrotopography and vellus hair follicle morphology/distribution were labeled as “insufficient evidence
for” ethnic differences rather than “inconclusive” because only two studies or less have examined these
variables.
Abbreviation: TEWL, transepidermal water loss.
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
55

=== Page 73 ===
19. Pershing LK, Reilly CA, Corlett JL, et al. Assessment of pepper spray product potency in Asian and
Caucasian forearm skin using transepidermal water loss, skin temperature, and reflectance
colorimetry. J Appl Toxicol 2006; 26:88–97.
20. Astner S, Burnett N, Rius-Diaz F, et al. Irritant contact dermatitis induced by a common household
irritant: a noninvasive evaluation of ethnic variability in skin response. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006;
54(3):458–465.
21. Distante F, Berardesca E. Hydration. In: Berardesca E, Eisner P, Wilhelm KP, et al., eds. Bioengineering
of the skin: methods and instrumentation. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press Inc., 1995:5–12.
22. Triebskorn A, Gloor M. Noninvasive methods for the determination of skin hydration. In: Frosch PJ,
Kligman AM, eds. Noninvasive methods for the quantification of skin functions. Berlin; New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1993:42–55.
23. Johnson LC, Corah NL. Racial differences in skin resistance. Science 1962; 139:766–767.
24. Manuskiatti W, Schwindt DA, Maibach HI. Influence of age, anatomic site and race on skin roughness
and scaliness. Dermatology 1998; 196:401–407.
25. Sivamani, RK, Wu, GC, Gitis, NV, et al. Tribological testing of skin products: gender, age, and
ethnicity on the volar forearm. Skin Res Technol 2003; 9(4):299–305.
26. Wahlberg JE, Lindberg M. Assessment of skin blood flow: an overview. In: Berardesca E, Eisner P,
Maibach HI, eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Cutaneous Blood Flow and Erythema. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press Inc., 1995:23–27.
27. Oberg PA. Laser-Doppler flowmetry. Crit Rev Biomed Eng 1990; 18:125.
28. Guy RH, Tur E, Bjerke S, et al. Are there age and racial differences to methyl nicotinate-induced
vasodilatation in human skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 12:1001–1006.
29. Gean CJ, Tur E, Maibach HI, et al. Cutaneous responses to topical methyl nicotinate in Black, Oriental,
and Caucasian subjects. Arch Dermatol Res 1989; 281:95–98.
30. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Cutaneous reactive hyperemia: racial differences induced by corticoid
application. Br J Dermatol 1989; 129:787–794.
31. Katzung BG. Introduction to autonomic pharmacology. In: Katzung BG, ed. Basic and Clinical
Pharmacology. Los Altos, CA: McGraw-Hill Co Inc., 2001:75–91.
32. Guehenneux SI, Le Fur I, Laurence A, et al. Age-related changes of skin microtopography in
Caucasian and Japanese women. [abstract] J Invest Dermatol 2003; 121(1):0350 (abstr).
33. Diridollou S, de Rigal J, Querleux B, et al. Skin topography according to ethnic origin and age.
L’Oreal Ethnic Hair and Skin, Chicago 2005 (abstr).
34. Rawlings AV. Ethnic skin types: are there differences in skin structure and function? Int J Cosmet Sci
2006; 28:79–93.
35. de Rigal J, Diridollou S, Querleux B, et al. The skin sebaceous function: ethnic skin specificity. L’Oreal
Ethnic Hair and Skin, Chicago 2005 (abstr).
36. Mangelsdorf S, Otberg N, Maibach HI, et al. Ethnic variation in vellus hair follicle size and
distribution. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2006; 19:159–167.
37. Otberg N, Richter H, Schaefer H. Variations of hair follicle size and distribution in different body sites.
J Invest Dermatol 2004; 122:14–19.
38. Taylor S. Skin of color: biology, structure, function, and implications for dermatologic disease. J Am
Acad Dermatol 2002; 46(2).
39. Szabo G, Gerald AB, Pathak MA, et al. Racial differences in the fate of melanosomes in human
epidermis. Nature 1969; 222:1081–1082.
40. Konrad K, Wolff K. Hyperpigmentation, melanosome size, and distribution patterns of melanosomes.
Arch Dermatol 1973; 107:853–860.
41. Thong HY, Jee SH, Sun CC, et al. The patterns of melanosome distribution in keratinocytes of human
skin as one determining factor of skin colour. Br J Dermatol 2003; 149:498–505.
42. Alaluf S, Atkins D, Barrett K, et al. Ethnic variation in melanin content and composition in
photoexposed and photoprotected human skin. Pigment Cell Res 2002; 15:112–118.
43. Alaluf S, Barrett K, Blount M, et al. Ethnic variation in tyrosinase and TYRP1 expression in
photoexposed and photoprotected human skin. Pigment Cell Res 2003; 16:35–42.
44. Tadokoro T, Yamaguchi Y, Batzer J, et al. Mechanisms of skin tanning in different racial/ethnic
groups in response to ultraviolet radiation. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 124:1326–1332.
45. Mackintosh J. The antimicrobial properties of melanocytes, melanosomes, and melanin and the
evolution of black skin. J Theor Bio 2001; 211(2):101–113.
46. Rebora A, Guarrera M. Racial differences in experimental skin infection with Candida albicans. Acta
Derm Venereol 1988; 68:165–168.
47. Richards, G, Oresajo C, Halder, R. Structure and function of ethnic skin and hair. Dermatol Clin 2003;
21(4).
48. Van Nieuwpoort, F, Smith, N, Kolb, R, et al. Tyrosine-induced melanogenesis shows differences in
morphologic and melanogenic preferences of melanosomes from light and dark skin types. J Invest
Dermatol 2004; 122(5):1251.
56
Saggar et al.

=== Page 74 ===
49. Rijken F, Bruijnzeel L, van Weelden H, et al. Responses of black and white skin to solar-simulating
radiation: differences in DNA photodamage, infiltrating neutrophils, proteolytic enzymes induced,
keratinocyte activation, and IL-10 expression. J Invest Dermatol 2004; 122(6):1448–1455.
50. Tadokoro T, Kobayashi N, Zmudzka BZ, et al. UV-induced DNA damage and melanin content in
human skin differing in racial/ethnic origin. FASEB J. 2003; 17(9):1177–1179.
51. US Census Bureau. Profile of general demographic characteristics, 2003.
52. Populations Projections Program. Projections of the resident population by race, Hispanic origin, and
nationality: middle series 2050–2070. Washington: Population Division, US Census Bureau.
53. Chan J, Ehrlich A, Lawrence R, et al. Assessing the role of race in quantitative measures of skin
pigmentation and clinical assessments of photosensitivity. J Am Acad Dermatol 2005; 52(4).
54. Oppenheimer GM. Paradigm lost: race, ethnicity, and the search for a new population taxonomy. Am
J Public Health 2001; 91(7):1049–1055.
Ethnic Differences in Skin Properties: The Objective Data
57

=== Page 76 ===
6
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and
Physiological Factorsa
Miranda A. Farage
Feminine Clinical Sciences Innovation Center, The Procter & Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Alexandra Katsarou
Department of Dermatology, University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Certain individuals experience more intense and frequent adverse sensory effects than the
so-called normal population after topical use of personal care products, a phenomenon known
in popular usage as sensitive skin. Consumer reports of sensitive skin are self-diagnosed and
often not verifiable by objective signs of physical irritation. Manufacturers of cosmetic and
personal care products are challenged to provide safe products to consumers with vast
differences in skin type, culture, and habits. This review examines the still incomplete
understanding of this phenomenon with respect to etiology, diagnosis, appropriate testing
methods, possible contributing host factors (e.g., gender, ethnicity, age, anatomical site,
cultural and environmental factors), and the future directions needed for research.
The term “sensitive skin”—of lay origin (1)—commonly refers to an exaggerated and
unpleasant sensitivity of the skin to frequent or prolonged use of everyday products such as
cosmetics or toiletries. Epidemiological surveys reveal a high prevalence of sensitive skin. A
telephone survey of 800 ethnically diverse women in the United States found that 52%
professed sensitive skin, with no statistical difference between ethnic groups (2). A U.K. mail
survey of 2058 men and women found that 51.5% of the women and 38.2% of the men reported
sensitive skin, as well (3).
Researchers have largely ignored consumer reports of sensory irritation because they are both
difficult to quantify and frequently (50%) unaccompanied by visible signs (4). The reactions,
however, are ubiquitous and globally dispersed and demand a clinically satisfactory understanding.
The question is not merely academic; before introducing any new product into the marketplace,
manufacturers perform both skin safety testing and risk assessment to ensure skin compatibility
under a variety of potential exposure conditions (5). Consumer-perceived skin sensitivity is critical
commercially as well, even though it is largely sensory without obvious physical effect, it strongly
influences consumer choice (6). In fact, 78% of consumers who profess sensitive skin report avoid
some products because of unpleasant sensory effects associated with their use (2).
DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION OF SENSITIVE SKIN
The term “sensitive skin” needs to be defined precisely. A tenuous consensus in the literature
is that sensitive skin is characterized by subjective complaints of discomfort without
predictable classical visible signs of irritation (7) and without an immunological response
(7,8). Although transient redness, dryness, or tenderness may accompany adverse sensations
(8), and sensitive skin may be less supple or hydrated (9), subjects often experience sensory
effects only (8). Subjective irritation (9), invisible irritation (4), nonimmunological adverse skin
reactions (1), nonimmunological inflammation, and self-estimated enhanced skin sensitivity
(SEESS) (10) have been proposed as more clinically meaningful terms.
aAdapted from Farage MA, Katsarou A, Maibach H. Sensory, clinical and physiology factors in sensitive skin: A review. Contact
Dermatitis 2006, 55:1–14; with kind permission from Blackwell publishing group.

=== Page 77 ===
It is believed that some subjects report greater incidence of adverse reactions to certain
products because of higher sensitivity (1–3,5,9). Some individuals possess exaggerated sensitivity
to specific individual irritants (11). Despite the fact that some studies have shown that sensitive
skin patients are capable of distinguishing products on the basis of blinded sensory endpoints
(1,12), a clinically satisfactory description of observed sensitivities is still out of reach.
Progress in defining sensitive skin has been hampered by various issues. The condition is
typically self-diagnosed (7), and there is no agreement, beyond heightened sensitivity, on its
symptoms (1). Its presentations include stinging, itching, burning, dryness, erythema, desquama-
tion, papules, wheals, and scaling (1,13), which occur over a wide range of intensities (8). To
further complicate the diagnosis, cutaneous irritation is a syndrome with multiple potential factors
(7) such as age, genetics, hormonal factors, skin dryness, race, skin pigmentation, anatomical
region, preexisting diseases, cultural factors, and environmental factors (4).
Another challenge in the proper identification of the appropriate target population is finding
the best testing methods. Many people who profess sensitive skin do not predictably experience
visible signs of the sensations reported, while some who describe themselves as nonsensitive react
strongly to tests of objective irritation (14). In one study, an irritant dose that was completely
tolerable by 99 subjects caused pronounced irritation in the 100th one. Another study tested a three-
irritant panel in 200 subjects and found that 197 subjects reacted to at least one of three irritants,
while three subjects did not respond at all (15). In addition, the severity of individual responses to
irritants tested varied tremendously (16), even among chemicals with similar modes of action (1).
Testing has revealed sizeable variation within the same individual at different
anatomical sites (16) and even at the same anatomical site on the contralateral limb. An
aluminum patch test of irritant response to the surfactant sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) found
that the right and left arms differed significantly in 47% of individuals tested (17).
Furthermore, the methodology used may introduce additional variability: a similar SLS
patch test using a Finn chamber resulted in 84% of the subjects testing identically on the right
and left arms (17). Most methods have focused on objective assessment of physical effects to
the skin rather than on the sensory effects reported (12), and most test protocols have relied on
exaggerated exposure (5) of uncertain relationship to actual consumer use (1). In addition,
most actual testing has included very few subjects, while few have restricted subjects to those
with demonstrated sensitivity (5).
It is likely that the phenomenon of sensitive skin, when unraveled, will prove to be an
umbrella classification comprised of distinct subgroups of clinical sensitivities. Pons-Guiraud
(7) proposed three subgroups: (i) very sensitive skin, reactive to a wide variety of both
endogenous and exogenous factors with both acute and chronic symptoms and a strong
psychological component; (ii) environmentally sensitive skin, comprised of clear, dry, thin skin
with a tendency to blush or flush and reactive to primarily environmental factors; and
(iii) cosmetically sensitive skin, transiently reactive to specific and definable cosmetic products
(7). Muizzuddin et al. (18) defined three subgroups somewhat differently. Their classification
includes delicate skin, characterized by easily disrupted barrier function not accompanied by a
rapid or intense inflammatory response; reactive skin, characterized by a strong inflammatory
response without a significant increase in permeability; and stingers, characterized by a
heightened neurosensory perception to minor cutaneous stimulation (18).
METHODS APPLIED IN CLINICAL STUDIES
Researching sensitive skin has employed a variety of methodological approaches. Chemical
and mechanical irritants of numerous types and mechanisms have been employed, and
numerous methods of assessing reactivity have been devised. Methods can largely, however,
be broken down into those that assess neurosensory response (sensory reactivity tests), those
that assess visible cutaneous signs of irritation (irritant reactivity tests), and those that measure
structural and physiological parameters of the skin for indications of irritant effect (dermal
function tests) (Table 1).
Sensory Reactivity Tests
Sensory reactivity tests focus on the neurosensory component of the sensitive skin response.
The most popular has been the sting test (19), in which lactic acid is applied to the skin [other
60
Farage et al.

=== Page 78 ===
Table 1
Methods for Evaluating Sensitive Skin
Objective of test
Parameter measured and
most common irritant
Assessment
methodology
Advantages
Disadvantages
Sensory reactivity tests
To provide measure of
sensory perception of
pain in absence of
visible irritation
Stinging sensation with
lactic acid as most
common irritant
Sensory perception
questionnaire typically
utilizing point scale
l Very quick, easy, and inexpensive
l Requires no instrumentation
l Often nonreproducible
l Lacks objective criteria
l Relationship to objective measures of irritation
undefined
Irritant reactivity tests
To provide measure of
visible sequelae to
irritant exposure
(typically dryness or
erythema)
Objective cutaneous
irritation with SLS as
most common irritant
Visual scoring (measures
skin irritation by visual
inspection)
l Relatively inexpensive and quick
l Requires no instrumentation
l Often nonreproducible
l Not objective
l Relationship to neurosensory perception
undefined
LDV (measures skin
irritation by blood flow)
l Noninvasive
l Objective
l Quantitative
l Biomechanical assessment
l Requires expensive instrumentation
l Indirect measure, less sensitive than TEWL
l Defines negative and positive reactions, but
does not quantitate differences in positive
reactions well
l Some irritants (NaOH, dithanol) do not cause
measurable response
Color reflectance
(measures skin
irritation by minute
color change)
l Noninvasive
l Objective
l Accurate
l Reproducible
l Allows quantitative comparison
of erythema both within and
between individuals
l Requires expensive instrumentation
l Indirect measure
l Less sensitive than TEWL
To provide evaluation of
water loss in skin not
attributable to
sweating
TEWL (barrier integrity)
with SLS as most
common irritant
Evaporimeter (closed
chamber, open
chamber, and
ventilated chamber)
l Quantitative
l Best measure of skin damage
l Requires expensive instrumentation
l Requires stringent conditions
l Easily confounded by temperature, humidity,
host factors
To provide measure of
water content of the
skin by assessment of
a dielectric constant
Skin hydration with SLS
as most common
irritant
Electrical capacitance,
Corneometer1
l Quantitative
l Relatively quick
l Defines arbitrary units, difficult to standardize,
assumes ceteris paribus
l Confounded by skin surface features and salt
content
l Little correlation with irritant testing
(Continued )
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and Physiological Factors
61

=== Page 79 ===
Table 1
Methods for Evaluating Sensitive Skin (Continued )
Objective of test
Parameter measured and
most common irritant
Assessment
methodology
Advantages
Disadvantages
Structural sensitivity tests
To provide evaluation of
structural alteration of
skin as a result of
exposure to cutaneous
irritants
Skin thickness with SLS
as most common
irritant
Ultrasound
l Quantitative, relatively quick
l Highly accurate
l Noninvasive, suitable for any
anatomical site
l Requires expensive instrumentation
Light microscopy
l Quantitative
l Requires no specialized equipment
l Highly accurate
l Labor intensive
l Histological preparations subject to artifacts
l Invasive, not suitable for all anatomical sites
Confocal light microscopy
l Quantitative, accurate
l Allows
direct
measurement
on
unmodified skin
l Allows assessment of skin beyond
surface depth
l Requires specialized expensive equipment
To provide assessment
of alteration of skin
permeability as a result
of exposure to
cutaneous irritants
Skin penetrability with
SLS as most common
irritant
UV light
l Correlates well with skin sensitivity
l Requires specialized expensive equipment
Abbreviations: LDV, laser Doppler velocimetry; NaOH, sodium hydroxide; SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate; TEWL, transepidermal water loss; UV, ultraviolet.
62
Farage et al.

=== Page 80 ===
agents, including capsaicin, ethanol, menthol (1), sorbic acid, and benzoid acid (9), have also
been employed]. Tape stripping, a procedure that removes the stratum corneum, is sometimes
performed before irritants are applied (20).
Typically, the irritant is applied to the nasolabial fold, an area considered highly sensitive
because of a permeable horny layer, a high density of sweat glands and hair follicles, and rich
innervations (Fig. 1) (8,21). Sensory feedback is collected and typically quantified by a labeled
magnitude scale (13). Although the sting test is considered to be the best approach to defining
a potentially susceptible population (1), it has not proven predictive of sensitivity to other
irritants (21). It does have the advantage of being simple, quick, and relatively inexpensive to
perform, producing a mild, transient response without visible effect.
Although reports in the literature are relatively few, the innervation of the dermis and
epidermis has also been evaluated for physiological differences that could explain heightened
sensitivity, typically by staining neural tissue with compounds that illuminate specific
components of the neurosensory network (22).
Irritant Reactivity Tests
Irritant reactivity tests attempt to measure objective signs of irritation. The SLS method has
been the most common. A common ingredient of many cosmetics and other personal care
products, SLS is an anionic emulsifier with an irritant potential at a concentration of greater
than 1% or less (17). SLS modulates surface tension, alters the stratum corneum, increases
blood flow, and enhances skin permeability (17). It is a primary irritant that damages skin by
direct cytotoxic action, without prior sensitization (17).
SLS as well as other potential irritants have been applied in patch tests (1), including
chamber-facilitated patch tests (5,10,17,18), repeat insult patch tests (14,18,23), open application
tests (17,18), soak or wash tests (17), and plastic occlusion stress tests (POST) (17).
Irritant testing has often employed exaggerated exposure (4,13), with a demonstrated
capability of achieving product differentiation (4). Newer versions of the approach exaggerate
effects by adding a frictional component (13). These protocols, however, are not applicable to
Figure 1
The nasolabial fold, an area considered highly sensitive because of a permeable horny layer, a high
density of sweat glands and hair follicles, and rich innervations.
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and Physiological Factors
63

=== Page 81 ===
paper or tissue products, and many modern products produce few effects even under
exaggerated conditions. Interpretative caution must be exercised as well. Even physiological
saline can cause irritation with extended occlusive application (23), and real-life exposure is
typically short term, not occluded, and cumulative (17).
Other irritants employed have included dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (1), benzoic acid,
trans-cinnamic acid (1), acetic acid (5), octanoic acid (5), decanol (5), and vasodilators (24).
Mechanical irritation testing has evaluated facial tissue (20) and sanitary pad surfaces (23).
Frequently, reactivity to SLS and other irritants is scored visually to obtain clinically
graded assessments of erythema and edema (8,25). Erythema has also been measured by
cutaneous blood flow (10,26), plethysmography (26), and color reflectance (9). Laser Doppler
velocimetry (LDV) measures cutaneous blood flow, indirectly evaluating penetration of
vasoactive substances as a measure of permeability (26). Color reflectance measures slight
changes in color within three values of hue (17). A correlation between skin color by this
method and SLS dose has been demonstrated (9,17), although one author reported no
correlation (17) as well as a correlation with visual erythema scoring (17). Both techniques offer
a noninvasive (27) objective assessment of a subclinical skin process without external visible
effects (13). When testing the irritant potential of vasodilators, however, LDV and color
reflectance are an indirect measure dependent on vasodilation as the final endpoint of a five-
step physiological process (27).
Visual scoring of irritancy in the vulva has demonstrated that the area reacts less
intensively and recovers faster than does exposed tissue (28). Objective assessment by LDV,
unfortunately, has been demonstrated to be less sensitive in that anatomical area (27).
Available bioengineering techniques for quantifying irritation have, in general, proven less
suitable in the vulvar area than in other body regions (28).
Dermal Function Tests
Structural sensitivity tests measure structural or physiological changes that may be associated
with the neurosensory responses in sensitive skin. Transepidermal water loss (TEWL)
measures skin surface water loss (29) as a determinant of the integrity of barrier function (30)
and, therefore, quantifies skin damage (16). TEWL is considered an indicator of the functional
state of the stratum corneum (29) and has proven to be a better measure of irritant
susceptibility than clinical visual scoring (16). It is considered the single best measure of skin
sensitivity; a high baseline TEWL was defined by one author as “the” diagnostic criteria (17).
TEWL measurement has demonstrated a positive SLS dose-response curve for skin response
(17), and TEWL baseline measurements have proven to be correlated with sensitivity to SLS
(31). When compared with LDV, ultrasound, and color reflectance, TEWL was found to
correlate best with SLS exposure (17).
TEWL measurement is often accompanied by tape stripping, a procedure that does not
guarantee removal of the stratum corneum and that, when successful (13), no longer tests the
effect on normal skin (13). TEWL is also easily affected by endogenous factors such as
cutaneous blood flow, diurnal rhythm, and eccrine and sweat gland density (29), and it
requires temperature and humidity control for meaningful results (13).
Skin hydration, typically assessed by electrical capacitance, is characterized by significant
individual variation (17) and is heavily confounded by skin surface texture or density of hair (32).
Results have not correlated well with irritant patch testing (17). Hydration can be assessed with a
Corneometer1 (10) and is also sometimes expressed by desquamation index (33).
Skin thickness has been measured by ultrasound (17). Ultrasound measurements after
SLS exposure correlate well with TEWL assessment of barrier function (17). Light microscopy
with cyropreservation, however, is a more accurate assessment of epidermal thickness (34).
Skin penetration by ultraviolet (UV) light is dependent on both thickness and the structural
composition of the skin. Cutaneous sensitivity to UV light was found to have positive
correlation with skin sensitivity to a seven-irritant panel, especially as compared with
traditional classification of skin type, which was less reliable (17).
Future Needs in Method Development
The usefulness of any particular technique depends on the relative and actual degree of
changes present (28). Effective methodology could be defined as that in which sensitive skin
subjects successfully and consistently discriminate between products (35). Traditional testing
64
Farage et al.

=== Page 82 ===
has not achieved that goal or the ability to predict universal sensitivity (13). Useful methods
will need to be cost effective, reproducible, and minimally invasive (13). Instrumental
enhancement of visual scoring through polarized light and assessment of cytokine levels as a
measure of subclinical tissue damage are being planned (13).
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN IRRITANT STIMULATION AND
SENSORY RESPONSE
A subgroup of sensitive subjects, termed “stingers,” displays stronger sensory irritation to
chemical probes for stinging and burning, and some subjects have higher erythematous
responses to applied irritants (11).
Although initial studies observed an increased susceptibility to general irritation among
stingers (19), most subsequent research found no correlation (1,8). Strong reactivity to one
nonimmunological urticant has also failed to predict response to other urticants (1). There is
significant disparity, in fact, between the severity of self-reported symptoms and the presence
and strength of any objective signs (12), and few reports show correlation between sensory
effects and objective endpoints (12).
Two studies that evaluated the relationship between neurosensory responses and
objective clinical irritation and included only subjects that demonstrated sensory sensitivity
showed a correlation between sensory and objective signs. A study of sensitivity to facial tissue
(which did not exclude nonsensitive individuals) found that sensory effects were the most
reliable measure of product differences (20).
Although no predictive value was demonstrated for any individual sensitivity when
subjects were tested with a seven-irritant panel, a weak association between tests was
demonstrated by statistical analysis of binomial probability (1). However, studies that
evaluated the association of barrier function and sensitivity have yielded arguably the most
conclusive results. A high baseline TEWL was associated with increased susceptibility to
numerous cutaneous irritants by numerous studies and a variety of assessment methods (17).
HOST FACTORS AFFECTING SKIN SENSITIVITY
Numerous potential host factors (Table 2) undoubtedly play a role in experimental variability
observed in sensitive skin. Basic differences are evident from epidemiological studies. This
section summarizes the effects of gender, race, age, anatomical site, culture, environment, and
other possible host factors on skin sensitivity.
Gender
In general, women seem to complain of sensitive skin more often than men do (6), although no
gender differences were observed with respect to reactivity to 11 different tested irritants,
including SLS (16). The thickness of the epidermis was observed to be greater in males than in
females (p < 0.0001) (34), and hormonal differences, which may produce increased
inflammatory sensitivity in females, have also been demonstrated (17,48).
Ethnicity
Racial differences, with regard to skin susceptibility to irritants, are among the fundamental
questions in dermatotoxicology (5). Two large epidemiological studies reported no observed
racial differences in reporting product sensitivity (2,3). Most testing, however, has focused on
Caucasian females (5).
Differences have been observed in sensory perceptions, although substantive conclusions
are hard to provide. Asians have been reported to complain of unpleasant sensory responses
more often than Caucasians (37), supported by the observation that a higher incidence of
dropouts in a Japanese clinical study was due to adverse skin effects as compared to those in
Caucasian studies (37). There have also been reports of an increased sensory response as well
as speed of response in Asian subjects versus Caucasian in sensory testing (37). Another study,
however, found that fair-skinned subjects who are prone to sunburn had higher sensory
responses to chemical probes than those with darker skin tones (11). No racial differences in
innervation on an architectural or biochemical level have been observed (1).
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and Physiological Factors
65

=== Page 83 ===
Studies of racial differences with regard to irritants have yielded conflicting evidence.
Although black skin was demonstrated to have greater potential for irritant susceptibility than
white skin (16), another study found blacks to be less reactive than Caucasians (15). Asians
seemed to be more reactive than Caucasians in some studies and less reactive in others, even
within studies conducted by the same investigator and under the same protocol (5).
Tristimulus colorimeter assessment of skin reflectance observed that skin pigmentation was
inversely associated with susceptibility to irritation (17), supported by the finding that irritant
susceptibility to SLS is decreased after UVB exposure (tanning) (17).
Methyl nicotinate assessment of vasoactive response suggests that there may be genuine
racial differences in permeability (26). Increased percutaneous absorption of benzoic acid,
caffeine, and acetylsalicylic acid was demonstrated in Asians when compared with
Caucasians, and decreased percutaneous absorption was observed in blacks (37,11).
Some structural differences with the potential to influence permeability have also been
observed. Epidermal thickness was found to correlate with pigmentation (p ¼ 0.0008) but not
classical skin type (34). Tendencies to blush or flush are associated with both fair skin and a
tendency to skin sensitivity, implying barrier impairment and increased vascular reactivity (3).
Blacks and Asians were shown to have higher baseline TEWL values than Caucasians
(26). Although no significant differences in barrier function (Asian vs. Caucasian) were
observed (37), differences in ceramides between races have been observed (32,37), as has a
difference in the buoyant density of the stratum corneum (7). The number of sweat glands in
the skin has been proposed as an influencing factor in permeability, and a huge variation in
distribution and size of apocrine glands among races has been observed (37). Melanosomes of
blacks have also been observed to be dispersed, while in Caucasians and Asians, they are
membrane-bound aggregates (32).
Skin hydration has been observed to be higher in Black, Asian, and Hispanic subjects
than in Caucasians (22). There has been some association observed in blacks between sweat
gland activity and conductance (37), which may be because of the chemical composition of
sweat (5). The increased electrical resistance observed in blacks implies increased cohesion or
thickness of stratum corneum (32).
Table 2
Host Factors Thought to Promote Sensitive Skin
Factor
Reference
Female gender
Willis et al., 2001 (3)
Youth
Cua, et al., 1990 (16)
Hormonal Status
Britz et al., 1980 (36)
Cultural expectations in technologically advanced countries
Loffler et al., 2001 (10)
Fair skin that is susceptible to sunburn
Agner, 1991 (11)
Susceptibility to blushing and/or flushing
Willis et al., 2001 (3)
Skin pigmentation
Berardesca and Maibach, 1996 (32)
Robinson 2000 (5)
Aramaki et al., 2002 (37)
Thin stratum corneum
Freeman et al., 1962 (38)
Thomson, 1955 (39)
Pons-Guiraud, 2004 (7)
Decreased hydration of stratum corneum
Johnson and Corah, 1963 (40)
Corcuff et al., 1991 (41)
Disruption of stratum corneum
Loffler and Effendy, 1999 (30)
Pons-Guiraud, 2004 (7)
Increased epidermal innervation
Marriott et al., 2003 (42)
Increased sweat glands
Aramaki et al., 2002 (37)
Increased neutral lipids and decreased sphingolipids
Lampe et al., 1983 (43)
Decreased lipids
Seidenari et al., 1998 (9)
Reinertson and Wheatley, 1959 (44)
Brod, 1991 (45)
Elias and Menon, 1991 (46)
Schwarzendruber et al., 1989 (47)
High baseline TEWL
Lee and Maibach, 1995 (17)
Abbreviation: TEWL, transepidermal water loss.
66
Farage et al.

=== Page 84 ===
Human skin is individually variable, thus, the results of studies conducted in separate
populations (often with different methods) are difficult to interpret (5). Parallel studies are
needed to define genuine racial differences (5). A summary of racial differences between black
and Caucasian skin is shown in Table 3.
Table 3
Racial Differences in Skin Properties
A comparison between the black and Caucasian rarces
Skin property
Comparison results
References
Stratum corneum thickness
Equal in blacks and caucasians
Freeman et al., 1962 (38)
Thomson, 1955 (39)
Number of cell layers in
stratum corneum
Higher in blacks
Weigand et al., 1974 (49)
Stratum corneum resistance
to stripping
Higher in blacks
Weigand et al., 1974 (49)
Lipid content in stratum
corneum
Higher in blacks
Reinertson and Wheatley, 1959 (44)
Electrical resistance of
stratum corneum
Higher in blacks (twofold)
Johnson and Corah, 1963 (40)
Desquamation of stratum
corneum
Higher in blacks (twofold)
Corcuff et al., 1991 (41)
Corneocyte size
Equal
Corcuff et al., 1991 (41)
Amount of ceramides in
stratum corneum
Lower in blacks
Sugino et al., 1993 (50)
Variability of structural
parameters of stratum
corneum
Increased in blacks
Weigand et al., 1974 (49)
Spectral remittance
Lower in blacks (above 300 nm—2- to 3-fold) Anderson and Parrish, 1981 (51)
UV protection factor of
epidermis
Higher in blacks (3- to 4-fold—13.4 vs. 3.4)
Kaidbey et al., 1979 (52)
UV protection factor stratum
corneum
Higher in blacks (3.3 vs. 2.1)
Kaidbey et al., 1979 (52)
UVB transmission through
epidermis
Lower in blacks (4-fold, 7.4 vs. 29.4)
Kaidbey et al., 1979 (52)
Stratum corneum UVB
transmission
Lower in blacks (30.0 vs. 47.6)
Kaidbey et al., 1979 (52)
In vitro penetration of
fluocinolone acetonide
Lower in blacks
Berardesca and Maibach, 1996 (32)
In vitro penetration of water
No difference
Berardesca and Maibach, 1996 (32)
Differences
Bronaugh et al., 1986 (53)
Topical application of
anesthetic mixture
Less efficacy in blacks
Hymes and Spraker, 1986 (54)
In vivo penetration of
C-labeled dipyrithione
Lower in blacks (34% lower)
Agner, 1991 (11)
In vivo penetration of
cosmetic vehicle
Lower in blacks
Agner, 1991 (11)
Methylnicotinate-induced
vasodilation
Time to peak response equal
Guy et al., 1985 (55)
Slower in blacks
Kompaore et al., 1993 (26)
Berardesca and Maibach, 1990 (56)
Baseline TEWL
Higher in blacks
Kompaore et al., 1993 (26)
Higher in blacks (in vitro)
Wilson et al., 1988 (57)
Reactivity to SLS (measured
by TEWL)
Higher in blacks
Wilson et al., 1988 (57)
Reactivity to
dichlorethylsulfide (1%)
Lower in blacks (measured by erythema,
15% vs. 58%)
Marshall et al., 1919 (58)
Reactivity to
0-chlorobenaylidene
malonitrile
Lower, longer time to response in blacks
Weigand and Mershon, 1970 (59)
Reactivity to
dinitrochlorobenzene
Lower in blacks, but trend toward equalization
after removal of stratum corneum
Weigand and Gaylor 1974 (60)
Stinging response
Lower in blacks
Frosch and Kligman, 1981 (61)
Equal
Grove et al., 1984 (62)
Abbreviations: SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate; TEWL, transepidermal water loss; UV, ultraviolet; UVB,
ultraviolet B.
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and Physiological Factors
67

=== Page 85 ===
Age
Studies on age differences in skin sensitivity are rare and not collectively conclusive (16). No
differences in potential irritancy have been observed in subjects aged between 18 and 50 years
(17), although the skin of younger adults was demonstrated to be more sensitive than that of
elderly subjects (16). Interestingly, however, while tactile sensitivity has been shown to
decrease with age (22), pain sensation is preserved (22). Studies in elderly subjects have
demonstrated both decreased sensory nerve function and decreased skin innervation (22). The
potential for visible irritation also decreased with advancing age (16). Although less reaction to
an irritant stimulus was observed in elderly subjects, aged subjects took longer to heal (17).
Assessment of barrier function in the elderly compared with younger adults
demonstrated a decreased difference in TEWL measurements after SLS exposure in the
elderly (16). Although the thickness and number of layers in the stratum corneum do not
change, turnover time in the elderly did increase (16). Elderly patients were also shown to have
decreased sweat function, capability of inflammation and repair, skin hydration, and
peripheral microcirculation (63).
Although the number of personal care products aimed specifically at children continues
to expand, reports in the medical literature on skin sensitivity in children are almost
nonexistent. Children, however, have a higher surface area to body mass ratio and therefore
receive higher systemic exposure from dermal use of products (64).
Anatomical Site
Assessment of neurosensory and physiological differences in the skin at different anatomical
sites has been performed using sensory stimulators, irritants, and various methodologies that
evaluated structural components of the epidermis. Differences in skin sensitivity between
anatomical regions have been observed.
Exposed Skin
The nasolabial fold has been reported to be the most sensitive region of the facial area,
followed by the malar eminence, chin, forehead, and upper lip (42). Conflicting evidence
regarding sensitivity has been reported with regard to arms, legs, and torso (16). SLS-
sensitivity testing found that sensitivity increased from the wrist to the cubital fossa area (17).
Analysis of structural differences found that stratum corneum density varies tremendously
by anatomical site: palms and soles are the thickest, while the genital area is the thinnest (65). The
rate of turnover in the stratum corneum (37), 10 days in facial areas, is longer elsewhere (65).
Stratum corneum thickness yielded inconsistent results (34). TEWL following SLS exposure was
found to be greater at the wrist than other sites on the forearm (17).
Vulva
The vulva differs substantively from exposed skin in numerous characteristics likely to affect
vulvar susceptibility to topically applied agents (14); a summary is presented in Table 4. The
outer mons pubis and labia majora are keratinized and stratified, much like the skin in other
areas (48). The vulva, however, is also characterized by a frictional component, occlusion,
increased hydration (48), increased hair follicles and sweat glands, and increased blood flow
(14). The labia minor (inner one-third) through the vestibule, which is increasingly hydrated, is
thinner, not keratinized or clearly stratified, and absent of hair follicles and sweat glands (14).
Safety-testing protocols are typically designed to be done on exposed or partially
occluded skin, and routine testing of potential irritants on the vulva itself are not logistically
feasible (14). The elevated hydration of the vulvar area makes measurements difficult (29).
Developed methods are, in general, less suitable to the vulvar area, and observed changes are
less dramatic (28).
Permeability testing done in keratinized vulvar skin indicates that the vulva may be
more permeable than other keratinized skin (48), although evidence is somewhat conflicting
(14). The discrepancy may be related to the specific chemical tested and its postulated
mechanism of tissue penetration. Polar molecules, surfactants, and steroids, known to have
different polarities and therefore different penetration characteristics, have demonstrated
sensitivity differences predicted by their chemical structures (14).
68
Farage et al.

=== Page 86 ===
Nonkeratinized vulvar skin exhibits clearly increased permeability related to the absence
of keratin and loosely packed, less-structured lipid barrier (14). In addition, the inner epithelia
are thinner, representing a shorter distance to penetrate (14). Buccal tissue is often employed in
a surrogate model for vulvar testing, as it has very similar structure and biochemistry (14).
Buccal skin has been demonstrated to be 10 times more permeable than keratinized skin (48).
An association between facial skin reddening as a result of topical product use and the
likelihood of vulvar erythema was shown in a recent study (76). The results of this study
showed that individuals who presented with vulvar erythema at study enrolment reported
statistically higher frequency of observable facial skin reddening with use of topical products.
Although the vulvar area may be particularly susceptible to cutaneous irritation (77),
little objective published data exist on the relationship between feminine hygiene products and
sensitive skin (78,79). Irritant reactions to feminine care products have been reported (73), with
a few feminine products that contain chemicals known to be irritants in certain doses (20,73).
However, the potential for heightened vulvar susceptibility to topical agents is not widely
reported in literature (14). The contribution to irritation by topical agents though is substantial
(14,48) and often underestimated (48). In fact, 29% of patients with chronic vulvar irritation
were demonstrated to have contact hypersensitivity, and 94% of those were determined to
have developed secondary sensitization to topical medications (73). Thus, reported sensitivity
in the vulvar area often may be related to underlying contact hypersensitivity because of
excessive use of topical hygienic and medicinal preparations (80).
Available bioengineering techniques are, in general, less suited for quantification of
irritation in the vulvar area (28). TEWL, hydration by electrical capacitance, and pH—all
invisible skin surface changes—are less sensitive in the well-hydrated environment of the
vulva (28). Methods measuring inflammatory reactions are more sensitive in general than
those measuring other sensitivity parameters (28) and are better used in combination than
alone. The authors suggest that blood flow, pH, and color reflectance used in combination
were found to be the best approach to measuring sensitivity to irritation in the vulvar area,
with increased sensitivity and specificity compared with any individual assessment (28).
Safety testing must consider the potential for heightened permeability of skin in the vulvar
area and increased secondary sensitization (14). Modification of risk assessment is also required,
possibly by the insertion of uncertainty factors into the quantitative risk assessment (QRA)
Table 4
Differences Between Keratinized Vulvar Skin and Other Regions of the Body
Characteristic
Difference in vulvar skin
Reference
Occlusion
Increased
Farage and Maibach, 2004 (14)
Permeability
Increased
Lesch et al., 1989 (66)
van der Bijl et al., 1997 (67)
Friction
Increased
Elsner et al., 1990 (68)
Heterogeneity
Markedly increased
Elsner et al., 1990 (68)
Hydration
Increased
Elsner et al., 1990 (68)
Erickson and Montagna, 1972 (69)
Number of hair follicles
Increased
Elsner et al., 1990 (68)
Britz and Maibach, 1985 (70)
Elsner and Maibach 1990 (71)
Number of sweat glands
Increased
Elsner et al., 1990 (68)
Elsner and Maibach, 1990 (71)
Blood flow
Increased
Elsner et al., 1990 (68)
Innervation
Increased
Elsner et al., 1990 (72)
Capacitance
Increased
Marren et al., 1992 (73)
Baseline TEWL
Increased
Marren et al., 1992 (73)
Hydrocortisone absorption
Increaseda
Britz et al., 1980 (36)
Elsner and Maibach 1991 (27)
Reactivity to BKC
Increaseda
Britz and Maibach, 1979 (74)
Reactivity to maleic Acid
Increaseda
Britz and Maibach, 1979 (74)
Reactivity to SLS (low concentration)
Decreased
Elsner et al., 1991 (75)
aCompared specifically to forearm.
Abbreviations: BKC, benzalkonium chloride; SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate; TEWL, transepidermal water loss.
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and Physiological Factors
69

=== Page 87 ===
system of risk calculation (14). Factors in range of 1 to 10 for keratinized vulvar skin and 1 to 20
for mucosal tissues have been proposed on the basis of permeability (14).
Cultural Factors
The first question that must be asked is whether a subgroup of people who have broad
reactivity to personal care products genuinely exists. It has been proposed in both the popular
media (81) and the medical literature (10) that the increasing incidence of sensitivity represents
a “princess and the pea” effect, wherein it has become culturally fashionable to claim sensitive
skin. A reported prevalence of greater than 50% in women on two separate continents (2,3)
defies its perception as a minority complaint and tends to support a psychosocial component.
The phenomenon is recorded in all industrial nations (2), however, and the prevalence
reported in women from two continents was virtually identical [52% (2) and 51.5% (3)],
lending credibility to consumer complaints supported by the observation that avoidance of
products containing potential irritants can eliminate hypersensitivity (18).
Cultural factors may play a role as well. Hygiene practices are the most common cause of
vulvar irritation (48). Fastidious cleansing routines (with douches, perfumes, medication,
antifungal medications, and contraceptives), which often precede irritation (48), undoubtedly
have some cultural component.
Environmental Factors
A majority of sensitive skin sufferers report unpleasant sensory responses to cold temper-
atures, wind, sun, pollution, and heat (2,7). An increased susceptibility to SLS was observed in
the winter compared with the summer (17); it is known that low temperatures and humidity
characteristic of winter cause lower water content in the stratum corneum (17).
Other Host Factors
Numerous other host factors that could influence skin include unusual occupational or leisure
exposures to chemicals and home climate control measure (10). Long-term or excessive use (7)
of personal care products can also create sensitivities. Daily topical use of corticosteroids has
been demonstrated to produce fragile skin (7), and excessive use of topical medications has
been demonstrated to be the source of up to 29% of vulvar dermatitis. Drug-induced
sensitivity is also possible, although no reports on that issue were uncovered. Interestingly, one
study found the thickness of the epidermis to be inversely proportional to the number of years
that the subject had smoked (p ¼ 0.0001) (34).
Another important consideration is the relationship of sensitive skin to other
dermatological conditions. Atopic dermatitis (AD) is considered by many to be a possible
predisposing condition (3,7). A positive relationship has been demonstrated between atopic
dermatitis and stinging (7), and the density of cutaneous nerves has been demonstrated to be
higher in atopic skin than in normal skin (82). Also, baseline TEWL in uninvolved skin in AD
patients, which is higher than that of normal subjects (31), was shown to predict susceptibility
to irritants in other sites (31). Atopy in general has been linked by some authors to the
phenomenon of sensitive skin (31). Patients with respiratory atopy and active rhinoconjuncti-
vitis were found to have increased skin susceptibility to irritants (30). It has been conjectured
that alloallergens may disrupt barrier function, thereby increasing skin susceptibility (30). An
association between sensitive skin and rosacea has also been postulated. In one study of
rosacea patients, 64% were also found to be stinger-positive (82). Pulsed dye laser treatment of
rosacea was demonstrated to result in decreased stinging (82).
DISCUSSION
The goal of premarket safety testing is to avoid unexpected consumer effects to marketed
products (20). Skin testing is typically conducted tier-wise with increasing robustness (14);
such testing combined with judicious product formulation lends confidence to market
release (14). Recently, however, we have seen that safety-testing methods may not be
robust enough (13). Consumers discriminated between products on the basis of how they
felt during use, basing product preferences on perceived effects not predicted by premarket
testing (13).
70
Farage et al.

=== Page 88 ===
Methods capable of detecting very subtle skin benefits or potential for adverse effects are
needed. Testing has been conducted primarily on normal subjects, bringing into question the
need to focus on examining populations that may be inherently more sensitive to irritant
effects (14). Limited studies that enrolled only subjects shown to have sensitive skin did find
better correlation (78,79).
Few studies have been performed in parallel and fewer still with a multiple-irritant
panel. Effective testing will require multiple regimes to identify truly sensitive people (1). A
sensitive skin panel must be approached with great caution (8), however, and must define
relevant exposures, limit confounding factors, and include irritants of different mechanisms.
Correlation between sensory and objective data may be associated primarily with higher levels
of exposure (4). In addition, current differences reported in SLS response may be related to the
fact that two different forms of different irritant potentials have been employed (17).
At present, associations between observed reactivities are weak (10) and underlying
pathophysiological factors poorly understood (18). Although it is clear that specific individuals
have heightened sensitivity to different kinds of sensory and physical irritants, observed
reactions are not predictive of generalized sensitivity, and the relationship between observed
sensitivities is cloudy (8,18). Recent evidence suggests that sensitive skin may not be a single
condition, but one that encompasses different categories of subjects and sensitivities on the
basis of different mechanisms (9).
Sensory differences may be related to innervation (42). Dermal nerve fibers extend
throughout viable epidermis as free nerve endings, but the epidermal component of this
network is still poorly characterized (42). Epidermal nerve density variation could explain the
different sensitivity thresholds in various anatomical sites (22). Although no differences in
innervation have yet been observed (42), little research on this mechanism has been performed.
Barrier function has been shown to be a critical component of skin discomfort (11,18). The
permeability barrier in the stratum corneum requires the presence of well-organized
intracellular lipids (7,18) and depends highly on lipid composition (16). Increased neutral
lipids and decreased sphingolipids are associated with superior barrier properties (16).
Irritation results from the abnormal penetration in the skin of potentially irritating substances
and a resulting decrease in the skin tolerance threshold (7). A weak barrier inadequately
protects nerve endings and facilitates access to antigen-presenting cells, a mechanism that
would support an association with atopic conditions (18).
The lipid content of the stratum corneum has been shown to be a more accurate predictor
of skin permeability than stratum corneum thickness or cell number (16). Alterations of
baseline capacitance values imply barrier impairment and support the view that hyper-
reactivity to water-soluble irritants results from increased absorption (9).
Subclinical irritation may be the key to understanding sensitive skin (4). Sensations
elicited by treatment with different products are generally discerned before observable
differences (4). Visual irritation tests by definition measure lasting effects, while sensory effects
are immediate (15). There is also indication that the skin has been damaged histologically
before visible signs of inflammation or skin dryness. TEWL levels have been shown to increase
without objective irritation (4), as has the release of inflammatory mediators (4,37). These
findings have led to the hypothesis that clinical signs occur only when the threshold level of
irritation is exceeded (4).
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Global marketing seeks to provide safe and useful products to an audience with tremendous
potential differences in race, age, sex, skin type, culture, habits, and practical use of marketed
product (5). It has become evident recently that sensory effects not predicted by current
premarket testing are the main purchasing criteria of the consumer. An objective for improved
testing would be the identification of a sensitive skin panel in which subjective data
consistently correlated with objective data (1) and which includes irritants of different
mechanisms and receptor types. Larger study populations are needed to overcome individual
variability to obtain reproducible results (14). Tools to further exaggerate exposures, enhance
ability to clinical score irritation (visual or via instrumentation), and identify new objective
endpoints for subjective sensory effects are also needed (13). The challenge of the future is to
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and Physiological Factors
71

=== Page 89 ===
clarify the still murky correlation between self-perceived consumer sensory irritation and
objective indications of clinical irritation, a correlation that is to date absent from the published
literature (1).
REFERENCES
1. Marriott M, Holmes J, Peters L, et al. The complex problem of sensitive skin. Contact Dermatitis 2005;
53:93–99.
2. Jourdain R, de Lacharriere O, Bastien P, et al. Ethnic variations in self-perceived sensitive skin:
epidemiological survey. Contact Dermatitis 2002; 45:162–169.
3. Willis CM, Shaw S, de Lacharriere O, et al. Sensitive skin: an epidemiological study. Br J Dermatol
2001; 145:258–263.
4. Simion FA, Rhein LD, Morrison BM Jr, et al. Self-perceived sensory responses to soap and synthetic
detergent bars correlate with clinical signs of irritation. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 32:205–211.
5. Robinson MK. Racial differences in acute and cumulative skin irritation responses between Caucasian
and Asian populations. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 42:134–143.
6. Reilly DM, Ferdinando D, Johnston C, et al. The epidermal nerve fibre network: characterization of
nerve fibres in human skin by confocal microscopy and assessment of racial variations. Br J Dermatol
1997; 163–170.
7. Pons-Guiraud A. Sensitive skin: a complex and multifactorial syndrome. J Cosmet Dermatol 2005;
3:145–148.
8. Coverly J, Peters L, Whittle E, et al. Susceptibility to skin stinging, non-immunologic contact urticaria
and acute skin irritation; is there a relationship? Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:90–95.
9. Seidenari S, Francomano M, Mantovani L. Baseline biophysical parameters in subjects with sensitive
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:311–315.
10. Loffler H, Dickel H, Kuss O, et al. Characteristics of self-estimated enhanced skin susceptibility. Acta
Derm Venereol 2001; 81:343–346.
11. Agner T. Basal transepidermal water loss, skin thickness, skin blood flow and skin colour in relation
to sodium-lauryl-sulphate-induced irritation in normal skin. Contact Dermatitis 1991; 25:108–114.
12. Farage MA, Santana MV, Henley E. Correlating sensory effects with irritation. Cutan Ocular Toxicol
2005; 24:45–52.
13. Farage MA. Are we reaching the limits or our ability to detect skin effects with our current testing and
measuring methods for consumer products? Contact Dermatitis 2005; 52:297–303.
14. Farage MA, Maibach HI. The vulvar epithelium differs from the skin: implications for cutaneous
testing to address topical vulvar exposures. Contact Dermatitis 2004; 51:201–209.
15. Basketter DA, Wilhelm KP. Studies on non-immune contact reactions in an unselected population.
Contact Dermatitis 1996; 35:237–240.
16. Cua AB, Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Cutaneous sodium lauryl sulphate irritation potential: age and
regional variability. Br J Dermatol 1990; 123:607–613.
17. Lee CH, Maibach HI. The sodium lauryl sulfate model: an overview. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33:1–7.
18. Muizzuddin N, Marenus KD, Maes DH. Factors defining sensitive skin and its treatment. Am J
Contact Dermat 1998; 9:170–175.
19. Frosch P, Kligman AM. Method for appraising the sting capacity of topically applied substances. J Soc
Cosmetic Chem 1977; 28:197–209.
20. Farage MA. Assessing the skin irritation potential of facial tissues. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 2005; 24:125–135.
21. Basketter DA, Griffiths HA. A study of the relationship between susceptibility to skin stinging and
skin irritation. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 29:185–188.
22. Besne I, Descombes C, Breton L. Effect of age and anatomical site on density of sensory innervation in
human epidermis. Arch Dermatol 2002; 138:1445–1450.
23. Farage MA, Stadler A, Elsner P, et al. New surface covering for feminine hygiene pads:
dermatological testing. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 2005; 24:137–146
24. Gean CJ, Tur E, Maibach HI, et al. Cutaneous responses to topical methyl nicotinate in Black, oriental,
and Caucasian subjects. Arch Dermatol Res 1989; 281:95–98.
25. Berardesca E, Elsner P, Wilhelm KP, et al., eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Methods and
Instrumentation. New York: CRC Press, 1995.
26. Kompaore F, Marty JP, Dupont C. In vivo evaluation of the stratum corneum barrier function in
blacks, Caucasians and Asians with two noninvasive methods. Skin Pharmacol 1993; 6:200–207.
27. Elsner P, Maibach HI. Cutaneous responses to topical methyl nicotinate in human forearm and vulvar
skin. J Dermatol Sci 1991; 2:341–345.
28. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Multiple parameter assessment of vulvar irritant contact dermatitis.
Contact Dermatitis 1990; 23:20–26.
72
Farage et al.

=== Page 90 ===
29. Warren R, Bauer A, Greif C, et al. Transepidermal water loss dynamics of human vulvar and thigh
skin. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2005; 18:139–143.
30. Loffler H, Effendy I. Skin susceptibility of atopic individuals. Contact Dermatitis 1999; 40:239–242.
31. Effendy I, Loeffler H, Maibach HI. Baseline transepidermal water loss in patients with acute and
healed irritant contact dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33:371–374.
32. Berardesca E, Maibach H. Racial differences in skin pathophysiology. J Am Acad Dermatol 1996;
34:667–672.
33. Manuskiatti W, Schwindt DA, Maibach HI. Influence of age, anatomic site and race on skin roughness
and scaliness. Dermatology 1998; 19:401–407.
34. Sandby Moller J, Poulsen T, Wulf HC. Epidermal thickness at different body sites: relationship to age,
gender, pigmentation, blood content, skin type and smoking habits. Acta Derm Venereol 2003; 83:410–413.
35. Joffres MR, Sampalli T, Fox RA. Physiologic and symptomatic responses to low-level substances in
individuals with and without chemical sensitivities: a randomized control blinded pilot booth study.
Environ Health Perspect 2005; 113:1178–1183.
36. Britz MB, Maibach HI, Anjo DM. Human percutaneous penetration of hydrocortisone: the vulva.
Arch Dermatol Res 1980; 267:313–316.
37. Aramaki J, Kawana S, Effendy I, et al. Differences of skin irritation between Japanese and European
women. Br J Dermatol 2002; 146:1052–1056.
38. Freeman RG, Cockerell EG, Armstrong J, et al. Sunlight as a factor influencing the thickness of the
epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 1962; 39:295–297.
39. Thomson ML. Relative efficiency of pigment and horny layer thickness in protecting the skin of
Europeans and Africans against solar violet radiation. J Physiol (Lond) 1955; 127:236–238.
40. Johnson LC, Corah NL. Racial differences in skin resistance. Science 1963; 139:766–769.
41. Corcuff P, Lotte C, Rougier A, et al. Racial differences in corneocytes. Acta Derm Venereal (Stockh)
1991; 17:146–148.
42. Marriott M, Whittle E, Basketter DA. Facial variations in sensory responses. Contact Dermatitis 2003;
49:227–231.
43. Lampe MA, Burlingame AL, Whitney J, et al. Human stratum corneum lipids: characterization and
regional variations. J Lipid Res 1983; 24:120–130.
44. Reinertson RP, Wheatley VR. Studies on the chemical composition of human epidermal lipids. J Invest
Dermatol 1959; 32:49–51.
45. Brod J. Characterization and physiological role of epidermal lipids. Int J Dermatol 1991; 30:84–90.
46. Elias PM, Menon GK. Structural and lipid biochemical correlates of the epidermal permeability
barrier. In: Elias PM ed. Advances in Lipid Research. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1991; 1–25
47. Schwarzendruber DC, Wertz PW, Kitko DJ, et al. Molecular models of intercellular lipid lamellae in
mammalian stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1989; 92:251–257.
48. Farage MA. Vulvar susceptibility to contact irritants and allergens: a review. Arch Gynecol Obstet
2005; 272:167–172.
49. Weigand DA, Haygood C, Gaylor JR. Cell layers and density of Negro and Caucasian stratum
corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1974; 62:563–565.
50. Sugino K, Imokawa G, Maibach H. Ethnic difference of stratum corneum lipid in relation to stratum
corneum function. J Invest Dermatol 1993; 100:597–601.
51. Anderson R, Parrish J. The optics of human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 77:13–17.
52. Kaidbey KH, Agin PP, Sayre RM, et al. Photoprotection by melanin—a comparison of Black and
Caucasian skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1979; 1:249–260.
53. Bronaugh RL, Stewart FR, Simon M. Methods for in vitro percutaneous absorption studies VII: Use of
excised human skin. J Pharm Sci 1986; 75:1094–1097.
54. Hymes JA, Spraker MK. Racial differences in the effectiveness of a topically applied mixture of local
anesthetics. Reg Anesth 1986; 11:11–13.
55. Guy RH, Tur E, Bjerke S, et al. Are there age and racial differences to methyl nicotinate-induced
vasodilation in human skin? J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 12:1001–1006
56. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Racial differences in Pharmacodynamic response to nictonates in vivo in
human skin: Black and white. Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 1990; 70:63–66.
57. Wilson D, Berardesca E, Maibach HI. In vitro transepidermal water loss: differences between black
and white human skin. Br J Dermatol. 1988; 119:647–652.
58. Marshall EK, Lynch V, Smith HV. Variation in susceptibility of the skin to dichloroethylsulfide.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1919; 12:291–301.
59. Weigand DA, Mershon MM. The cutaneous irritant reaction to agent O-chlorbenzylidene
malononitile (CS); quantitation and racial influence in human subjects. Edgewood Arsenal Technical
Report 4332, February 1970.
60. Weigand DA, Gaylor AM. Irritant reaction in Negro and Caucasian skin. South Med J 1974;
67:548–551.
Sensitive Skin: Sensory, Clinical, and Physiological Factors
73

=== Page 91 ===
61. Frosch P, Kligman AM. A method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied substances.
J Soc Cosmetic Chem 1981; 28:197.
62. Grove GL, Soschin DM, Kligman AM. Adverse subjective reactions to topical agents. In: Drill VA,
Lazar P, eds. Cutaneous Toxicity. New York: Raven Press, 1984; 203–212
63. Abdel-Rahman TA, Collins KJ, Cowen T, et al. Immunohistochemical, morphological, and functional
changes in the peripheral sudomotor neuro-effector system in elderly people. J Cutan Pathol 1995;
22:154–159.
64. Goveia M, Balbus J, Parkin R. Children’s susceptibility to chemicals: a review by developmental stage.
J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev 2004; 7:417–435.
65. Tagami H. Racial differences on skin barrier function. Cutis 2002; 70:6–7; (discussion 21–23).
66. Lesch CA, Aquier CA, Cruchley A, et al. The permeability of human oral mucosa and skin to water.
J Dent Res 1989; 68:1345–1349.
67. Van der Bijl P, Thompson IO, Squier CA. Comparative permeability of human vaginal and buccal
mucosa to water. Eur J Oral Sci 1997; 105(6):571–575.
68. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Frictional properties of human forearm and vulvar skin; Influence
of age and correlation with transepidermal water loss and capacitance. Dermatologica 1990; 181:
88–91.
69. Erickson KL, Montagna W. New observations on the anatomical features of the female genitalia. J Am
Med Women’s Assoc 1972; 27:573–581.
70. Britz M, Maibach HI. Normal vulvar skin: a model for specialized skin. In: Maibach H, Lowe N, eds.
Models in dermatology, vol 1. Basel, Switzerland: Karger, 1985; 83–88.
71. Elsner P, Maibach HI. The effect of prolonged drying on transepidermal water loss, capacitance and
pH of human vulvar and forearm skin. Acta Derm Venereol 1990; 70:105–109.
72. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Physiological skin surface water loss dynamics of human vulvar
and forearm skin. Acta Derm Venereol 1990; 70:141–144.
73. Marren P, Wojnarowska F, Powell S. Allergic contact dermatitis and vulvar dermatoses. Br J Dermatol
1992; 126:52–56.
74. Britz MB, Maibach HI. Human cutaneous vulvar reactivity to irritants. Contact Dermatitis 1979; 5:
375–377.
75. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Effects of low concentration sodium lauryl sulfate on human vulvar
and forearm skin. J Reprod Med 1991; 36:77–81.
76. Farage MA, Bowtell P, Katsarou A. The relationship Among Objectively Assessed Vulvar Erythema,
Skin Sensitivity, Genital Sensitivity, and Self-Reported Facial Skin Redness. J Appl Res 2006; (4):
272–281.
77. Farage MA, Stadler A, Elsner P, et al. Safety evaluation of modern feminine hygiene pads: two
decades of use. Female Patient 2004; 29:23–30.
78. Farage MA, Stadler A. Cumulative irritation patch test of sanitary pads on sensitive skin. J Cosmet
Dermatol 2005; 4(3):179–183.
79. Farage MA, Maibach H. Cumulative skin irritation test of sanitary pads in sensitive skin and normal
skin population. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 2007; 26:37–43.
80. Nardelli A, Degreef H, Goossens A. Contact allergic reactions of the vulva: a 14-year review.
Dermatitis 2004; 15:131–136.
81. Singer, N. Face it, Princess, Your Skin is Probably Quite Common. New York Times. October 13, 2005.
Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/13/fashion/thursdaystyles/13skin.html?
ex=1139115600&en=9f46b6665adaf175&ei=5070. Accessed February 3, 2006.
82. Lonne-Rahm S, Berg M, Marin P, et al. Atopic dermatitis, stinging, and effects of chronic stress: a
pathocausal study. J Am Acad Dermatol 2004; 51:899–905.
74
Farage et al.

=== Page 92 ===
7
Neurophysiology of Self-Perceived
Sensitive-Skin Subjects by Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Bernard Querleux
L’Ore´al Recherche, Aulnay-sous-bois, France
Olivier de Lacharrie`re
L’Ore´al Recherche, Clichy, France
INTRODUCTION
The diagnosis of sensitive skin is defined by neurosensory hyperreactivity of the skin and is
essentially based on self-perceived sensations of people who report facial skin discomfort as
stinging, burning, and itching when their skin is exposed to some environmental factors (wind,
sun, or pollution) or after application of topical products (hard water, soap, or cosmetics) (1–3).
Epidemiological studies performed on large populations have shown that about 50% of
women declare that they have self-perceived sensitive skin (SPSS), and 10% fall into the
category “very sensitive” (4). Similar percentages have been obtained in different populations:
African Americans, Asians, Caucasians, or Hispanics (5). SPSS is lower in the male population
(30%) and tends to decrease with age (4,6).
Even if reported, adverse reactions could be the very first symptoms of an irritant contact
dermatitis (7), sensitive skin is not a pathological disorder (8).
This chapter will first present a short review of the different approaches for assessing
sensitive skin. Then we will present in detail a new approach based on the analysis of the
pattern of brain activation in self-assessed sensitive-skin subjects compared with nonsensitive-
skin subjects using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
TESTS AVAILABLE: A REVIEW
Psychophysical tests were proposed to measure the chemosensory response of the skin after
application of lactic acid or capsaicin, for instance (9–11). With constant stimulation (for
instance, a 10% lactic acid product as the stimulus), it has been shown that there was a
statistically significant difference in the global degree of discomfort combining the sensations
of stinging, burning, and itching, allowing two populations of subjects to be defined. A first
group, characterized by low scores can be classified as subjects with nonsensitive skin, while a
second group, characterized by high scores, can be classified as subjects with sensitive skin.
However, these psychophysical tests are still based on the subject’s self-perceived response.
A slightly modified procedure to the lactic acid stinging test proposed in 1977 (8) is
nowadays the most widely used. However, it has been reported that it does not fully render
the complexity of self-assessed sensitive skin, as illustrated by the discrepancy between lactic
acid response and self-perception of sensitive skin (12–14). In 2000, this difference was taken
into account for the recommendation to include “stingers” with a concomitant self-declared
sensitive skin as panelist for safety testing (13).
Owing to the great similarity of symptoms induced by topically applied capsaicin to
those associated with sensitive skin (10), a new elicitation test using a 0.075% emulsion of a
pungent component extracted from chili peppers was proposed (11,15). Topical application of
capsaicin leads to a short release of neuropeptides (substance P, CGRP) from peripheral nerve
endings and causes the appearance of uncomfortable sensations. Authors reported that
unpleasant reactions are more intense as also more frequent in SPSS subjects.
All these provocative tests are based on the quantification of the degree of discomfort in
response to a defined stimulation (10% lactic acid or 0.075 capsaicin). In psychophysics, an

=== Page 93 ===
alternative method is based on detection threshold. This procedure has been tested recently
(16) and consisted in attaining the detection threshold of topically applied capsaicin. Five
capsaicin concentrations were used in 10% ethanol aqueous solution (3.16  105%,
1.0  105%, 3.16  104%, 1.0  104%, and 3.16  103%). This new test of skin neurosensitivity
which is easy, quick, and painless, appears to be promising for the diagnosis of sensitive skin; and
could also provide a basis for the assessment of modulators of skin neurosensitivity.
In 1998, another psychophysiological test based on the assessment of peripheral
sensitivity to thermal stimuli was suggested as a possible diagnosis of sensitive skin (17). Two
recent studies reported contradictory results, which could indicate that differences in thermal
sensitivity were too weak to consider this thermal indicator as an accurate predictive indicator
of sensitive skin (16,18).
As both epidemiological surveys and psychological tests are partly subjective as these
approaches are based on the verbal response of the volunteers, some authors have used
noninvasive methods to analyze skin properties such as transepidermal water loss, skin
hydration, or skin color. Instrumental measurements do not show large differences between
subjects with sensitive skin and those with nonsensitive skin, even if some alteration of the
barrier function in people with sensitive skin has been reported by some authors (14,19,20).
BRAIN PATTERN ANALYSIS OF SENSITIVE-SKIN SUBJECTS BY fMRI
Rationale
Our knowledge on sensitive skin shows us that it is not easy to assess because it mainly lacks
visible, physical, or histological measurable signs, and such phenomenon has even led some
authors to question the reality of this skin condition (21). However, when people report the
subjective perception of discomfort or low painful sensations, it should be informative to study
the responses of those with sensitive skin and those with nonsensitive skin during the final
step of integration of the information, which takes place in the central nervous system.
Regarding this topic, most studies have concerned the processes in the central nervous system
of nociceptive information, such as pain perception, to describe the neural bases of pain
intensity. More recently, some studies have analyzed a more subjective aspect of pain
perception, including feelings of unpleasantness and emotions associated with future
implications, termed “secondary affect” (22,23). Some authors have studied less severe
sensations than pain such as itch, and reported activation of some similar structures as
described for pain (24–26).
The aim of the study, detailed in the next paragraphs, was to assess brain activation
during a provocation test involving very slightly painful stimulation and a feeling of
discomfort, in two groups of subjects classified as sensitive skin or nonsensitive skin.
Materials and Methods
Subjects
After informed consent, 18 healthy young women (mean age: 33  9 years) participated in this
study, which was approved by the hospital ethics committee. The main inclusion criteria were
absence of dermatological, neurological, or vascular condition affecting the face, nonuse of
topical or systemic treatments that might interfere with the results of the test, and no
contraindications to MRI.
Nine of them were classified as having sensitive skin and nine as having nonsensitive
skin, based on their responses to the questionnaire described in the following section.
Questionnaire
To maximize differences between the two groups, subjects were required to have a response
profile highly characteristic of sensitive skin on the questionnaire (Table 1). Sensitive skin was
characterized by the cutaneous reaction to topical applications and to environmental factors.
Answers to the 13 questions were actually used to allocate groups. The following subjects
were considered as having sensitive skin: those answering “yes” to two of the first three
questions (sensitive skin, reactive skin, and irritable skin), yes to three of the four questions on
skin reaction to cosmetics (questions 4–7), and yes to three of the six questions on the
76
Querleux and de Lacharrie`re

=== Page 94 ===
environment (questions 8–13). In contrast, subjects who answered no to the 13 questions were
classed as having nonsensitive skin. Table 1 shows the frequency of yes answers to the 13
questions in both groups. The table shows that the two groups were very different with regard
to the auto-evaluation of skin sensitivity.
Task
Before the MR examination, it was clearly explained to the volunteers what would happen in
the scanner and what they would be asked to do. It consisted of simultaneous application to
the face of two products described as “likely to induce discomfort.” Volunteers did not know
that the lactic acid product was applied on the right side of their face (single-blind protocol).
During the MR acquisition, whenever they saw an arrow on the screen, subjects were
asked to press the 4-position keyboard to report the level of discomfort perceived on the left
side of the face when the arrow was pointing to the left and on the right side of the face when
the arrow was pointing to the right. Particular attention was taken to check that all the subjects
had the same understanding of the global degree of discomfort corresponding to the
cumulative effect of stinging, burning, and itching.
A 4-level rating system was used:
1.
0: no or very slight discomfort
2.
1: slight discomfort
3.
2: moderate discomfort
4.
3: severe discomfort
fMRI protocol
Three-dimensional MR images were first acquired to have the exact brain anatomy for each
subject. Then products A and B were applied simultaneously on the nasolabial folds for
Table 1
Sensitive-Skin Questionnaire with Frequencies of Positive Responses for Both Groups
Questionnaire
Sensitive skin (n ¼ 9)
Nonsensitive skin (n ¼ 9)
1. Do you regard yourself as having a sensitive
facial skin?
100%
0%
2. Do you consider yourself as having a facial skin
prone to irritation?
89%
0%
3. Do you consider yourself as having a reactivea
facial skin?
100%
0%
4. Do you avoid certain cosmetics, which you feel
may cause your facial skin to reacta?
100%
0%
5. Do you consider that your facial skin reactsa
readily to cosmetics or toiletries?
89%
0%
6. Do some cosmetics or toiletry products make
your facial skin itch, sting, or burn?
100%
0%
7. Have you ever experienced an adverse reaction
on your face to a cosmetic or toiletry product?
100%
0%
8. Does the expression “does not tolerate cold
weather or a cold environment” apply to your
facial skin?
89%
0%
9. Does the expression “does not tolerate hot
weather or a hot environment” apply to your
facial skin?
78%
0%
10. Does the expression “does not tolerate fast
changes in temperature” (e.g., going into a
warm shop from a cold street) apply to your
facial skin?
100%
0%
11. Does going out in the wind cause your facial
skin to itch, burn, or sting?
56%
0%
12. Does going out in the sun cause your facial skin
to itch, burn, or sting?
67%
0%
13. Does your facial skin reacta to air pollution?
56%
0%
aStinging, burning, and/or itching sensations with or without redness.
Neurophysiology of Sensitive-Skin Subjects by fMRI
77

=== Page 95 ===
10 seconds (Fig. 1), and fMRI acquisition (echo-planar imaging sequence) started immediately
and consisted of following brain activation every 3 seconds during 10 minutes.
Results
Self-Assessment Results
A mean cumulative degree of discomfort was calculated for each group and each product and
confirmed a statistically significant increase of discomfort on the side where the lactic acid was
applied compared with the saline-solution side. The difference was greater in the sensitive-
skin group.
We report (Fig. 2) the mean kinetic curve of discomfort for each condition.
The time intervals between 0 and 80 seconds and from 480 to 640 seconds were classified as
a low- or null-discomfort period, while the phase between 80 and 480 seconds was classified as a
medium- or high-discomfort period.
We used these results to construct the fMRI time contrast, as fMRI can only analyze brain
activation by varying only one condition, which is in this protocol: the degree of discomfort.
fMRI Results
Brain activation when the arrow was pointing to the control side (saline solution). Figures 3A
and B present mean activation maps for both groups corresponding to periods of time when
subjects responded looking at the arrow pointing to the left (saline solution). It can be seen on the
3-D images that no activation was detected in any part of the brain. However, at least the visual
cortex should have been activated as subjects received visual stimuli (the arrow projected on the
screen), and the motor cortex should have been activated as subjects pressed the keyboard to rate
the degree of discomfort. As the central phase was compared with the beginning and end phases
of the time period, activation was stable over time, so that no difference was detected related to
time for the visual and motor tasks, which were constant during the acquisition time.
Figure 1
Lactic acid and saline solution as control were simultaneously applied to the nasolabial areas with a
cotton wool bud. The subject’s hand was on the 4-position keyboard to quantify the degree of discomfort induced
by the products during the MR acquisitions. Abbreviation: MR, magnetic resonance.
78
Querleux and de Lacharrie`re

=== Page 96 ===
Brain activation when the arrow was pointing to the stimulated side (lactic acid solution).
Figures 4A and B present the mean activation maps for both groups during periods pointing to
the right (the lactic acid solution). In the nonsensitive skin group, most of the activated pixels
were located in the left primary area of the sensory cortex (first step of the cortical pathway).
Other small areas of activation can be seen in associated areas.
In the sensitive-skin group, the mean activated maps were very different. There was
considerable activation in the left primary sensory area, and considerable bilateral activation in
the sensory cortex and in the prefrontal cortex, as well as some activation in deeper structures
located in the limbic system (Fig. 4B-inset).
Discussion
The results of subjective data (self-perceived clinical signs) from the lactic acid test in a limited
number of subjects were consistent with the results in the literature obtained in a greater
number of subjects (27,28). In both groups, the discomfort rating was higher in subjects with
sensitive skin, and the kinetics were comparable over about 10 minutes, with rapid onset of
discomfort and a perceptible decrease after 7 to 8 minutes. It is also important to relate this to
the capacity to lateralize the discomfort perceived in the two facial zones, which were only
separated by a few centimeters.
During responses concerning the control saline solution applied to the left side of the face
(Fig. 3), no cerebral activation changing with time was observed in either group. However,
throughout the acquisition, subjects saw the luminous arrow, which activated areas of the
visual cortex and had to press the keyboard to give their responses, which activated areas of
Figure 2
Kinetics of discomfort for both groups and for the two products. These curves were used to construct
the fMRI contrast by differentiating a phase from 80 to 480 seconds corresponding to a high degree of discomfort,
a phase from 0 to 80 seconds and a phase from 480 to 640 seconds corresponding to a low degree of discomfort.
(1) Lactic acid (10%) on sensitive-skin subjects; (2) Lactic acid (10%) on nonsensitive-skin subjects; (3) Saline
solution on sensitive-skin subjects; (4) Saline solution on nonsensitive-skin subjects. Abbreviation: fMRI, functional
magnetic resonance imaging.
Figure 3
Brain activation maps obtained by fMRI. Saline solution as control. (A) Subjects with nonsensitive skin;
(B) Subjects with sensitive skin. No changes in brain activation were observed as a function of time. Visual and
motor stimuli were stable during the acquisition time. Abbreviation: fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Neurophysiology of Sensitive-Skin Subjects by fMRI
79

=== Page 97 ===
the motor cortex. It can clearly be seen that there was no difference during the two phases
chosen, since these stimuli were constant during the recording. The control recording
demonstrates that the activation maps corresponding to perception of discomfort with lactic
acid can be interpreted with confidence, based on the only stimulation changing over time in
the protocol: the degree of discomfort.
In the group with nonsensitive skin, cerebral activation was essentially located in the left
primary somatosensory area of the cortex. Since the afferent nerve fibers cross in the spinal
cord, controlateral activation corresponds to the first step in neural treatment of the
stimulation. Other activations, in very small areas, are more difficult to interpret. In the
group of subjects with sensitive skin, cerebral activation maps present a very different pattern.
As the first step of cortical integration, there was considerable activation of the primary area of
the left sensory cortex, as in the group with nonsensitive skin. Bilateral extensions in the
sensory cortex and the prefrontal cortex, together with activation of the subcortical areas (the
cingular cortex) showed multidimensional perception of the sensation. These activations may
be interpreted as the consequence of attention, emotion, and possibly planning the action in
response to the unpleasant sensation induced by the stimulation particularly felt by subjects
with sensitive skin.
As a consequence, these fMRI results contribute to reinforcing the confidence in self-
assessment results, since groups differentiated on the basis of the questionnaire present
different cerebral activation maps, and the contrast needed for the fMRI to compare two
situations (presence/absence of discomfort) was based on the subjects’ feelings in the MRI
scanner and measured using a keyboard.
CONCLUSION
Although fRMI could not be considered as a tool to evaluate efficiency in routine products on
SPSS subjects, the results we have reported here are of great interest in this field. The different
brain activation observed with fMRI, between high SPSS subjects and none, is clearly
reinforcing the neural pattern for this disorder.
In addition, it is of importance to observe that with the questionnaire we have developed
all along the study we have conducted, we can select subjects with different neurophysiologic
patterns as demonstrated by fRMI. Consequently, with this very simple mean we could get
pertinent phenotypes regarding sensitive skin.
Finally, we also have to underline that the activated brain areas are those that are usually
involved in the painful process. Everything occurs on SPSS subjects as if the threshold to feel
discomfort of the skin is lower than the one for SPSS subject. The origin of this low threshold
could be linked to specific central nervous system patterns, to peripheric neural patterns, or
also to both. New studies are still needed to answer these questions.
Figure 4
Brain activation maps obtained by fMRI. Lactic acid as a provocation test. (A) Subjects with
nonsensitive skin; (B) Subjects with sensitive skin. Nonspecific activation was recorded in both groups in the
primary contralateral sensory cortex, which can be considered as the first cortical pathway of this type of sensory
perception. Bilateral extensions in the sensory cortex and the prefrontal cortex. Inset activation in internal
structures, such as in cingulate cortex, was specific to the sensitive-skin group. Abbreviation: fMRI, functional
magnetic resonance imaging.
80
Querleux and de Lacharrie`re

=== Page 98 ===
REFERENCES
1. de Groot AC, Nater JP, van der Lende R, et al. Adverse effects of cosmetics and toiletries: a
retrospective study in the general population. Int J Cosmet Sci 1988; 9:255–259.
2. Jourdain R, de Lacharrie`re O, Shaw S, et al. Does allergy to cosmetics explain sensitive skin? Ann
Dermatol Venereol 2002; 129: 1S11–1S77 (IC0360).
3. De Lacharrie`re O. Peaux sensibles, peaux re´actives. In: Encycl Me´d Chir. (Cosme´tologie
et Dermatologie Esthe´tique 50-220-A10). Paris: Elsevier, 2002:4p.
4. Willis CM, Shaw S, de Lacharriere O, et al. Sensitive skin: an epidemiological study. Br J Dermatol
2001; 145(2):258–263.
5. Jourdain R, de Lacharrie`re O, Bastien P, et al. Ethnic variations in self-perceived sensitive skin:
epidemiological survey. Contact Dermatitis 2002; 46:162–169.
6. Johnson AW, Page DJ. Making sense of sensitive skin. Poster 700. IFSCC Yokohama, Japan, 1995.
7. Simion FA, Rhein LD, Morrison BM, et al. Self-perceived sensory responses to soap and synthetic
detergent bars correlate with clinical signs of irritation. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 32:205–211.
8. Christensen M, Kligman AM. An improved procedure for conducting lactic acid stinging tests on
facial skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1996; 47:1–11.
9. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. A method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied
substances. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:197–209.
10. Green BG, Bluth J. Measuring the chemosensory irritability of human skin. J Toxicol-Cutan Ocul
Toxicol 1995; 14(1):23–48.
11. de Lacharrie`re O, Reiche L, Montastier C, et al. Skin reaction to capsaicin: a new way for the
understanding of sensitive skin. Australas J Dermatol 1997; 38(S2):3–313.
12. Ota N, Horiguchi T, Fujiwara N, et al. Identification of skin sensitivity through corneocyte
measurement. IFSCC Magazine 2001; 4:9–14.
13. Bowman JP, Floyd AK, Znaniecki A, et al. The use of chemical probes to assess the facial reactivity of
women, comparing their self-perception of sensitive skin. J Cosmet Sci 2000; 51:267–273.
14. Seidenari S, Francomano M, Mantovani L. Baseline biophysical parameters in subjects with sensitive
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:311–315.
15. Jourdain R, de Lacharrie`re O, Willis CM, et al. Does links between sensitive skin, sensitivity to
thermal stimuli, lactic acid stinging test and capsaicin discomfort test. Ann Dermatol Venereol 2002;
129:1S594.
16. Jourdain R, Bastien P, de Lacharrie`re O, et al. Detection thresholds of capsaicin: a new test to assess
facial skin neurosensory. J Cosmet Sci 2005; 56:153–166.
17. Yosipovitch G, Maibach HI. Thermal sensory analyzer, boon to the study of C and A fibers. Curr Probl
Venereol 1998; 26:84–89.
18. Saumonneau M, Black D, Bacle I, et al. Cutaneous thermal reactivity and sensitive skin: a pilot study.
Ann Dermatol Venereol 2002; 129:1S601.
19. Distante F, Rigano L, D’Agostino R, et al. Intra- and inter-individual differences in sensitive skin.
Cosmet Toiletries 117(7):39–46.
20. Bornkessel A, Flach M, Arens-Corell M, et al. Functional assessment of a washing emulsion for
sensitive skin: mild impairment of stratum corneum hydration, pH, barrier function, lipid content,
integrity and cohesion in a controlled washing test. Skin Res Technol 11(1):53–60.
21. Lo¨ffler H, Dickel H, Kuss O, et al. Characteristics of self-estimated enhanced skin susceptibility. Acta
Dermatol Venereol 2001; 81:343–346.
22. Price DD. Psychological and neural mechanisms of the affective dimension of pain. Science 2000;
289:1769–1772.
23. Coghill RC, McHaffie JG, Fen YF. Neural correlates of interindividual differences in the subjective
experience of pain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100(14):8538–8542.
24. Hsieh JC, Hagermark O, Stahle-Backdahl M, et al. Urge to scratch represented in the human cerebral
cortex during itch. J Neurophysiol 1994; 72(6):3004–3008.
25. Darsaw U, Drzezga A, Frisch M, et al. Processing of histamine-induced itch in the human cerebral
cortex: a correlation analysis with dermal reactions. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 115:1029–1033.
26. Drzezga A, Darsaw U, Treede RD, et al. Central activation by histamine-induced itch: analogies to
pain processing: a correlation analysis of O15 H2O positron emission tomography studies. Pain 2001;
92(1–2):295–305.
27. Muizzuddin N, Marenus KD, Maes DH. Factors defining sensitive skin and its treatment. Am
J Contact Dermat 1998; 9:170–175.
28. Hahn GS. Strontium is a potent and selective inhibitor of sensory irritation. Dermatol Surg 1999;
25:689–694.
Neurophysiology of Sensitive-Skin Subjects by fMRI
81

=== Page 100 ===
8
Tests for Sensitive Skin
Alessandra Pelosi and Enzo Berardesca
San Gallicano Dermatological Institute, Rome, Italy
INTRODUCTION
Sensitive skin is a condition of subjective cutaneous hyperreactivity to environmental factors or
topically applied products. The skin of subjects experiencing this condition reacts more easily
to cosmetics, soaps, and sunscreens and often enhance worsening after exposure to dry and
cold climate.
Sensitive skin and subjective irritation are widespread since the use of cosmetics is
increasing in economically advanced countries.
The frequent use of preservatives, perfumes, emulsifiers, and plant extracts enhance the
risk of adverse local reactions.
Signs of discomfort as itching, burning, stinging, and a tight sensation are commonly
present, associated or not associated with erythema and scaling.
Generally, substances that are not commonly considered irritants are involved in this
abnormal response. They include many ingredients of cosmetics such as dimethyl sulfoxide,
benzoyl peroxide preparations, salycilic acid, propylene glycol, amyldimethylaminobenzoic
acid, and 2-ethoxyethyl methoxycinnamate (1). The unpleasant sensations appear to be
associated with the stimulation of cutaneous nerve endings specialized in pain transmission,
called nociceptors.
Some authors (2) hypothesized a correlation between sensitive skin and constitutional
anomalies and/or other triggering factors such as occupational skin diseases or chronic
exposure to irritants; others (3) supported the fact that no constitutional factors play a role in
the pathogenesis of sensitive skin, though the presence of dermatitis demostrates a general
increase in skin reactivity to primary irritants, which lasts for months.
In different epidemiological surveys, the correlation between sensitive skin with sex,
race, skin type, and age has been studied. No sex-related significant differences have been
found in the reaction pattern.
Some authors (4–6) documented a higher reactivity to irritants mostly in females, some
others noted that male subjects were significantly more reactive than female (7), but other
experimental studies did not confirm these observations (8,9).
Conflicting data were also reported on skin sensitivity among races: although blacks
seem to be less reactive and Asians more reactive than Caucasians, data rarely reach statistical
significance (10); recently, Arakami found significant subjective sensory differences between
Asian and Caucasian women but no differences after sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) testing,
concluding that stronger sensations in Asians can reflect a different cultural behavior rather
than measurable differences in skin physiology (11).
Studying the correlation between skin reactivity and skin type, subjects with skin type I
were found to be more prone to develop sensitive skin (12); most common “stingers” were
reported to be light-complexioned persons of celtic ancestry who sunburned easily and tanned
poorly (13).
Moreover, skin reactivity tends to decrease with age: by testing croton oil, cationic and
anionic surfactants, and weak acids and solvents, less severe skin reactions were observed in
older subjects (14). Robinson, by testing sodium dodecyl sulphate, decanol, octanoic acid, and
acetic acid, confirmed this lower reactivity in the older age cluster of subjects (15).
Aged skin seems to have a reduced inflammatory response either to irritants or to
irritation induced by UV light (16,17). However, skin reactivity of women at the beginning of
the menopause is increased, suggesting a role of estrogen deficiency on the observed
impairment of skin barrier function (18).

=== Page 101 ===
TESTS FOR SENSITIVE SKIN
Clinical Parameters
It is difficult to find accurate parameters for categorizing skin as sensitive or nonsensitive; this
condition often lacks visible, physical or histological, measurable signs. Subjects with
subjective irritation tend to have a less hydrated, less supple, more erythematous and more
teleangiectatic skin, compared with the normal population. In particular, significant
differences were found for erythema and hydration/dryness (19). Tests for sensitive skin
are generally based on the report of sensation induced by topically applied chemicals.
Consequently, the use of self-assessment questionnaires is a valuable method to identify
“hyperreactors” (6) and a useful tool for irritancy assessment of cosmetics (20).
SENSORY TESTING METHODS
Psychophysical tests based on the report of sensation induced by topically applied chemical
probes have been increasingly used to provide definite information on sensitive skin. These
methods of sensory testing can be validated by the use of functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), which represent one of the most developed forms of neuroimaging. This
technique measures changes in blood flow and blood oxygenation in the brain, closely related
to neural activity manifested as sensory reaction.
When nerve cells are active, they consume oxygen carried by hemoglobin in red blood
cells from capillaries. The local response to this oxygen use is an increase in blood flow to
regions of increased neural activity, occurring after a delay of approximately one to five
seconds. This hemodynamic response rises to a peak over four to five seconds, before falling
back to baseline (and typically undershooting slightly). This leads to local changes in the
relative concentration of oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin and changes in local cerebral
blood volume in addition to changes in local cerebral blood flow (21).
Quantitation of Cutaneous Thermal Sensation
In dermatology, thermal sensation testing analysis is the most used quantitative sensory
testing (QST) technique (22). It assesses function in free nerve endings and their associated
small myelinated and nonmyelinated fibers. This method enables quantitative measurement of
the threshold for warm and cold sensation as well as hot and cold pain.
A small device, called thermode, based on Peltier elements, is in contact with the
subject’s skin. It consists of semiconductor junctions, which produce a temperature gradient
between the upper and lower stimulator surfaces produced by an electrical current. In the
center of the thermode, a thermocouple records the temperature.
TSA 20011 (Medoc company, Ramat Yshai, Israel) is considered one of the most
advanced portable thermal sensory testing devices.
Basically, it measures the hot or cold threshold and the suprathreshold pain magnitude
(Table 1).
TSA operates between 08C and 548C. The thermode in contact with the skin produces a
stimulus whose intensity increases or decreases until the subject feels the sensation.
As the sensation is felt, the subject is asked to press a button. The test is then repeated
two more times to get a mean value. Using this method, artefacts can occur because of the lag
time the stimulus needs to reach the brain. This inconvenience can be avoided by using
relatively slow rates of increasing stimuli.
The stimulus can also be increased stepwise, and the subject is told to say whether or not
the sensation is felt. When a positive answer is given, the stimulus is decreased by one-half the
Table 1
Thermal Sensory Test
Parameters monitored
Sensory fibers
Warm sensation
C fiber (1–28C above adaptation temperature)
Cold sensation
A-d fibers (1–28C above adaptation temperature)
Heat-induced pain
Mostly C fiber (458C)
Cold-induced pain
Combination of both C- and A-d fibers (108C)
84
Pelosi and Berardesca

=== Page 102 ===
initial step and so on, until no sensation is felt. The subject’s response determines the intensity
of the next stimulus. The limitation of this second method is that a longer performance time is
required.
Stinging Test
Stinging test represents a method for the assessment of skin neurosensitivity. Stinging seems to
be a variant of pain that develops rapidly and fades quickly anytime the appropriate sensory
nerve is stimulated. The test relies on the intensity of stinging sensation induced by chemicals
applied on the nasolabial fold (13). The procedure differs depending on the chemical used.
Lactic Acid
After a 5- to 10-minute facial sauna, an aqueous lactic acid solution (5% or 10% according to
different methods) is rubbed with a cotton swab on the test site, while an inert control
substance, such as a saline solution, is applied to the contralateral test site. After application,
within a few minutes, a moderate-to-severe stinging sensation occurs for the “stingers group.”
Subjects are then asked to describe the intensity of the sensation using a point scale.
Hyperreactors, particularly those with a positive dermatologic history, have higher scores.
Using this screening procedure, 20% of the subjects exposed to 5% lactic acid in a hot, humid
environment were found to develop a stinging response (13). Lammintausta et al. confirmed
these observations (23) identifying in his study 18% of subjects as stingers. In addition, stingers
were found to develop stronger reactions to materials causing nonimmunologic contact
urticaria and to have increased transepidermal water loss (TEWL) and blood flow velocimetry
values after application of an irritant under patch test.
Capsaicine
An alternative test involves the application of capsaicin. Recently, a new procedure assessed
by l’Oreal Recherche (24) appears to be more accurate and reliable for the diagnosis of sensitive
skin. After a facial cleansing, five increasing capsaicine concentrations in 10% ethanol aqueous
solution (3.16  105%; 1  104%; 3.16  104%; 1  103%; and 3.16  103%) are applied on
the nasolabial folds. The application of the vehicle alone serves as control and to exclude
subjects who feel any sensation of discomfort prior to capsaicine application. The formulation
of capsaicine in hydroalcoholic solution accelerates the action of capsaicin on the face in
comparison with the previously used 0.075% capsaicine emulsion, without being associated
with painful sensation.
The capsaicine detection thresholds are more strongly linked to self-declared sensitive
skin than the lactic acid stinging test.
Dimethylsulfoxide
The alternative application of 90% aqueous dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) has not the same
efficacy of lactic acid or capsaicine stinging test and, after application, intense burning, tender
wheal, and persistent erythema often occur in stingers.
Nicotinate and Sodium Lauryl Sulfate Occlusion Test
A different approach to identify sensitive skin relies on vasodilation of the skin as opposed to
cutaneous stinging. Methyl nicotinate, a strong vasodilator, is applied to the upper third of the
ventral forearm in concentrations ranging from 1.4% to 13.7% for a 15-second period. The
vasodilatory effect is assessed by observing the erythema and the use of laser Doppler
velocimetry (LDV). Increased vascular reaction to methyl nicotinate was reported in subjects
with sensitive skin (25). Similar analysis can be performed following application of various
concentrations of SLS.
Evaluation of Itching Response
Itchy sensation seems to be mediated by a new class of C fibers with an exceptionally lower
conduction velocity and insensivity to mechanical stimuli (26).
Indeed, no explanation of the individual susceptibility to the itching sensation without
any sign of coexisting dermatitis has been found. Laboratory investigations have also been
limited.
Tests for Sensitive Skin
85

=== Page 103 ===
An itch response can be experimentally induced by topical or intradermal injections of
various substances such as proteolytic enzymes, mast cell degranulators, and vasoactive
agents.
Histamine injection is one of the more common procedure: histamine dihydrochloride
(100 mg in 1 mL of normal saline) is injected intradermally in one forearm. Then, after different
time intervals, the subject is asked to indicate the intensity of the sensation using a
predetermined scale, and the duration of itch is recorded. Information is always gained by the
subject’s self-assessment.
A correlation between whealing and itching response produced by applying a topical 4%
histamine base in a group of healthy young females has been investigated (14). The itching
response was graded by the subjects from none to intense. The data showed that the
dimensions of the wheals do not correlate with pruritus. Also, itch and sting perception seem
to be poorly correlated.
The cumulative lactic acid sting scores were compared with the histamine itch scores in
32 young subjects; all the subjects who were stingers were also moderate-to-intense itchers,
while 50% of the moderate itchers showed little or no stinging response (14).
Furthermore, the histamine-induced itch sensation decreases after topically applied
aspirin (27). This result can be attributed to the role that prostaglandines play in pain and itch
sensation (28).
Localized itching, burning, and stinging can also be features of nonimmunologic contact
urticaria, a condition characterized by a local wheal and flare after exposure of the skin to
certain agents. Non-antibody-mediated release of histamine, prostaglandins, leukotriens,
substance P, and other inflammatory mediators may likely be involved in the pathogenesis of
this disorder (29). Several substances such as benzoic acid, cinnamic acid, cinnamic aldehyde,
and nicotinic acid esters are capable of producing contact nonimmunologic urticaria and
eliciting local edema and erythematous reactions in half of the individuals. Provocative tests
are based on an open application of such substances and well reproduce the typical symptoms
of the condition.
Washing and Exaggerated Immersion Tests
The aim of these tests is to identify a subpopulation with an increased tendency to produce a
skin response.
In the washing test (30), subjects are asked to wash their face with a specific soap or
detergent. After washing, individual sensation for tightness, burning, itching, and stinging is
evaluated using a point scale previously determined.
The exaggerated immersion test is based on soaking the hands and forearms of the
subjects in a solution of anionic surfactants (such as 0.35% paraffine sulfonate, 0.05% sodium
laureth sulfate-2EO) at 408C for 20 minutes.
After soaking, hands and forearms are rinsed under tap water and patted dry with a
paper towel. This procedure is repeated two more times, with a two-hour period between each
soaking, for two consecutive days. Prior to the procedure, baseline skin parameters are
evaluated. The other evaluations are taken 2 hours after the third and sixth soaking and
18 hours after the last soaking (recovery assessment). All of the skin parameters are performed
after the subjects have rested at least 30 minutes at 218C  18C.
BIOENGINEERING TESTS
Physiologic changes indicative of sensitive skin can be detected at low levels prior to clinical
disease presentation by using noninvasive bioengineering tests.
Transepidermal Water Loss
TEWL is used to evaluate water loss that is not attributed to active sweating from the body
through the epidermis to the environment and represents a marker of stratum corneum barrier
function. TEWL assessment can be performed using different techniques (closed chambers
method, ventilate chambers method, and open chambers method). Measurements are based on
the estimation of water pressure gradient above the skin surface. The open chambers
instruments consist of a detachable measuring probe connected by a cable to a portable main
signal-processing unit. The probe is provided with chambers open at both ends with relative
86
Pelosi and Berardesca

=== Page 104 ===
humidity sensors (hygrosensors) paired with temperature sensors (thermistors). TEWL values
(g m2 hr1) are calculated by the signal processing units in the probe handle and main unit
and are digitally displayed. The closed chamber instrument consists of a closed cylindrical
chamber containing the sensors. The humidity sensor based on a thin-film capacitative sensor
is integrated to a handheld microprocessor-controlled electronic unit provided with a digital
readout for the TEWL value (31,32).
Corneometry
The corneometry is a method to measure stratum corneum water content (electrical
measurements).
The instrument consists of a probe that should be placed to a hair-free skin surface with
slight pressure. It is described as being a “capacitance”-measuring device, operating at low
frequency (0.95–1.05 MHz), which is sensitive to the relative dielectric constant of material in
contact with the electrode surface. In about 20 milliseconds, it estimates water content of the
stratum corneum to an approximate depth ranging between 60 and 100 mm, using arbitrary
units.
The presence of salts or ions on the skin surface can affect the reading.
Laser Doppler Velocimetry
A monochromatic light from a helium-neon laser is transmitted through optical fibers to the
skin. The light is reflected with Doppler-shifted frequencies from the moving blood cells in the
upper dermis at the depth of *1 mm. The LDV extracts the frequency-shifted signal and
derives an output proportional to the blood flow. LDV is useful to evaluate the degree of skin
irritation (33).
Colorimetry
Surface color may be quantified using the Commission Internationale de L’Eclairage (CIE)
system of tristimulus values. The device uses silicon photocells. The measuring head of these
units contains a high-power-pulsed xenon arc lamp, which provides two CIE illuminant
standards. The color is expressed in a three-dimensional space. The coordinates are expressed
as L* (brightness) a* value (color range from green to red) and b* value (color range from blue
and yellow). The a* value, related to skin erythema, increases in relation to irritation and skin
damage.
Corneosurfametry
This method (34) investigates the interaction of surfactants with the human stratum corneum.
It is performed as follows: cyanoacrilate skin surface stripping (CSSS) is taken from the volar
aspect of the forearm and sprayed with the surfactant to be tested. After two hours, the sample
is rinsed with tap water and stained with basic fuchsin and toluidine blue dyes for three
minutes. After rinsing and drying, the sample is placed on a white reference plate and
measured by reflectance colorimetry (Chroma Meter1 CR200, Minolta, Osaka, Japan).
The index of redness (CIM ¼ Luminacy L* – Chroma C*) is taken as a parameter of the
irritation caused by the surfactant. This index has a value of 68  4 when water alone is
sprayed on the sample and decreases when surfactant is tested, with stronger surfactants
lowering the values.
Pie´rard et al. (35), testing different shampoo formulations in volunteers with sensitive
skin, demonstrated that corneosurfametry correlates well with in vivo testing. A significant
negative correlation (p < 0.001) was found between values of colorimetric index of mildness
(CIM) and the skin compatibility parameters (SCPs) that include a global evaluation of the
colorimetric erythemal index (CEI) and the TEWL differential, both expressed in the same
order of magnitude.
In the same study, corneosurfametry showed less interindividual variability than in vivo
testing, allowing a better discrimination among mild products.
An interesting finding showed that sensitive skin is not a single condition. Goffin (36)
hypothesized that the response of the stratum corneum to an environmental threat might be
impaired in different groups of subjects experiencing sensitive skin. Data of the corneosurfa-
metry performed after testing eight different house cleaning products showed that the overall
stratum corneum reactivity, as calculated by the average values of the corneosurfametry index
Tests for Sensitive Skin
87

=== Page 105 ===
(CSMI) and the CIM, is significantly different (p < 0.01) between detergent-sensitive skin and
both nonsensitive and climate/fabric-sensitive skin, as well.
Irregularity Skin Index
Irregularity skin index (ISI) can contribute to the identification of subjects with sensitive skin.
In a recent study (37) conducted on 243 subjects positive to the lactic acid stinging test,
slides of cyanoacrylate skin surface stripping (CSSS), obtained from the volar aspect of the
forearm, were examined by means of a computer-assisted fast Fourier transform (FFT) to
determine the skin surface micro-relief. Acquisition of the images was performed by a
stereomicroscope connected to an analogic video camera. The results confirmed a significant
correlation (p < 0.001) between intensity of symptoms in “stingers” and ISI. This procedure
represents a valuable and promising tool for the study and diagnosis of sensitive skin.
REFERENCES
1. Amin S, Engasser PG, Maibach HI. Side-effects and social aspect of cosmetology, In: Baran R,
Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Cosmetic Dermatology. London: Martin Dunitz, 1993:205.
2. Burckhardt W. Praktische und theoretische bedeutung der alkalineutralisation und alkaliresistenz-
proben. Arch Klin Exp Derm 1964; 219:600–603.
3. Bjornberg A. Skin reactions to primary irritants in patients with hand eczema, Thesis, Goteborg,
Isaccsons, 1968.
4. Agrup G. Hand eczema and other hand dermatoses in South Sweden. Academic dissertation,
Acta-Dermato-Venereologica, 1969; 49(suppl 61):1–91.
5. Fregert S. Occupational dermatitis in 10 years material. Contact Dermatitis 1975; 1:96–107.
6. Willis CM, et al. Sensitive skin: an epidemiological study. Br J Dermatol 2001; 145(2):258–261.
7. Wohrl S, et al. Patch testing in children, adults and the elderly: influence of age and sex on
sensitization patterns. Pediatr Dermatol 2003; 20:119–123.
8. Bjornberg A. Skin reactions to primary irritants in men and women. Acta Dermato-Venereologica
1975; 55:191–194.
9. Lammintausta K, Maibach HI, Wilson D. Irritant reactivity in males and females. Contact Dermatitis
1987; 17:276–280.
10. Modjtaheidi SP, Maibach HI. Ethnicity as a possible endogenous factor in irritant contact dermatitis:
comparing the irritant response among Caucasians, Blacks and Asians. Contact Dermatitis 2002;
47:272–278.
11. Aramaki J, Kawana S, Effendy I, et al. Differences of skin irritation between Japanese and European
Women. Br J Dermatol 2002; 146:1052–1056.
12. Lammintausta K, Maibach HI, Wilson D. Susceptibility to cumulative and acute irritant dermatitis.
An experimental approach in human volunteers. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 19:84–90.
13. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. A method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied
substances. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:197–199.
14. Grove GL. Age-Associated changes in intertegumental reactivity. In: Le´veque JL, Agache PG, eds.
Aging Skin. Properties and Functional Changes. New York, Basel, Hong Kong, 1993.
15. Robinson MK. Population differences in acute skin irritation responses. Race, sex, age sensitive skin
and repeat subject comparison. Contact Dermatitis 2002; 46(2):86–93.
16. Gilchrest BA, Stoff JS, Soter NA. Chronologic aging alters the response to ultraviolet-induced
inflammation in human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1982; 79:11–15.
17. Haratake A, Uchida Y, Mimura K, et al. Intrinsically aged epidermis displays diminished UVB-
induced alterations in barrier function associated with decreased proliferation. J Invest Dermatol
1997; 108:319–323.
18. Paquet F, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Fumal I, et al. Sensitive skin at menopause; dew point and
electrometric properties of the stratum corneum. Maturitas 1998; 28:221–223.
19. Seidenari S, Francomano M, Mantovani L. Baseline biophysical parameters in subjects with sensitive
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:311–315.
20. Simion FA, Rhein LD, Morrison BM Jr., et al. Self-perceived sensory responses to soaps and synthetic
detergent bars correlate with clinical signs of irritation. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 32:205–207.
21. Querleux B, Jourdain R, Dauchot K, et al. Specific brain activation revealed by functional MRI, 20th
World Congress of Dermatology, Paris. Ann Dermatol Venereol 2002; 129:1S42.
22. Yosipovitch G, Yarnitsky D. Quantitative sensory testing. In: Maibach H, Marzulli FN, eds.
Dermotoxicology Methods: the Laboratory Worker’s Vade Mecum. New York: Taylor & Francis, 1997.
23. Lammintausta K, Maibach HI, Wilson D. Mechanisms of subjective (sensory) irritation: propensity of
non immunologic contact urticaria and objective irritation in stingers. Dermatosen in Beruf und
Umwelt 1988; 36(2):45–49.
88
Pelosi and Berardesca

=== Page 106 ===
24. Jourdain R, Bastien P, de Lacharrie´re O, et al. Detection threshold of capsaicine: a new test to assess
facial skin neurosensivity. J Cosmet Sci 2005; 56:153–155.
25. Roussaki-Schulze AV, Zafiriou E, Nikoulis D, et al. Objective biophysical findings in patients with
sensitive skin. Drugs Exp Clin Res 2005; 31:17–24.
26. Schmelz M, Schmidt R, Bickel A, et al. Specific C-receptors for itch in human skin. J Neurosci 1997;
17(20):8003–8008.
27. Yosipovitch G, Ademola J, Lui P, et al. Topically applied aspirin rapidly decreases histamine-induced
itch. Acta Demato-venereol (Stockh) 1977; 77:46–48.
28. Lovell CR, Burton PA, Duncan EH, et al. Prostaglandins and pruritus. Br J Dermatol 1976; 94:273–275.
29. Lahti A, Maibach HI. Species specificity of nonimmunologic contact urticaria: guinea pig, rat and
mouse. J Am Acad 1985; 13:66–69.
30. Hannuksela A, Hannuksela M. Irritant effects of a detergent in wash and chamber tests. Contact
Dermatitis 1995; 32:163–166.
31. Pinnagoda J, Tupker RA, Agner T, et al. Guidelines for transepidermal water loss (TEWL)
measurements. A report from the Standardization Group of the European Society of Contact
Dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1990; 22:164–178.
32. Berardesca E, Vignoli GP, Distante F, et al. Effects of water temperature on surfactant induced skin
irritation. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 32:83–87.
33. Bircher A, de Boer EM, Agner T, et al. Guidelines for measurement of cutaneous blood flow by laser
Doppler flowmetry. A report from the Standardization Group of the European Society of Contact
Dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1994; 30:65–72.
34. Pie´rard GE, Goffin V, Pie´rard Franchimont C. Corneosulfametry: a predictive assessment of the
interaction of personal care cleansing products with human stratum corneum. Dermatology 1994;
189:152–156.
35. Pie´rard GE, Goffin V, Hermanns Leˆ T, et al. Surfactant-induced dermatitis: comparison of
corneosulfametry with predictive testing on human and reconstructed skin. J Am Acad Dermatol
1995; 33:462–469.
36. Goffin V, Pie´rard Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. Sensitive skin and stratum corneum reactivity to
household cleaning products. Contact Dermatitis 1996; 34:81–85.
37. Sparavigna A, Di Pietro A, Setaro M. Sensitive skin: correlation with skin surface microrelief
appearance. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12(1):7–10.
Tests for Sensitive Skin
89

=== Page 108 ===
9
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
L. Kilpatrick-Liverman, J. Mattai, R. Tinsley, and J. Wu
Colgate-Palmolive Technology Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
One of the main functions of the skin is to maintain a competent barrier to water loss (Table 1).
Water is continuously lost from the outermost skin layers to the atmosphere (evaporative water
loss); and to control the rate of water loss, the barrier integrity must be preserved. Maintaining
the barrier to water loss is important since hydration affects the skin’s appearance, mechanical
properties, and cell signaling processes (1–9). The barrier integrity can be compromised by
chemical insult (e.g., the use of surfactant-containing cleansing products or harsh chemicals),
mechanical insult, dry relative humidity conditions, and sun exposure (10–16).
There are several excellent review articles discussing stratum corneum structure,
biochemical processes, and the importance of maintaining well-hydrated skin (17–25). In this
chapter, we will build on these reviews with data pertaining to the importance of cleansing
with mild products, adaptability of the skin to changing environments, effect of excess water
exposure, and influence of diet on skin hydration. This chapter begins by examining the skin’s
intrinsic mechanisms for maintaining adequate hydration and concludes by discussing the
external influences that affect the skin’s water content (i.e., the environment, cleansing
products, moisturizing systems, and dietary practices).
STRATUM CORNEUM
The skin is divided into three main components: the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous fat
tissue. The stratum corneum is the uppermost layer of the epidermis. It is, in most body sites,
10 to 20 mm in depth and is composed of intercellular lipids and dead cells known as
corneocytes (26). Corneocytes are flat, hexagonal-shaped keratin-containing structures
surrounded by a protein-strengthened envelope. The protein envelope is made up of a
variety of proteins including involucrin, loricrin, filaggrin, proline-rich proteins, and
keratolinin (27,28). Corneocytes originate from proliferative epidermal cells known as
keratinocytes. As the keratinocytes divide and migrate up toward the outermost skin layers,
by a process known as differentiation, they change their morphology and cell content. By the
time they reach the stratum corneum, they become flattened, protein-rich sacs. The corneocytes
have no nucleus or any other cell organelles. Although the stratum corneum is sometimes
referred to as the nonviable epidermis, perturbation of this tissue initiates a cascade of events
occurring in the stratum corneum as well as in the viable epidermis [e.g., changes in protease
activity, lipid biosynthesis, aquaporin (AQP), and filaggrin expression, etc.] (29).
The epidermis is divided into four main continuous layers: the stratum corneum, stratum
granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale. As Figure 1 illustrates, the character of the
cells within each of these layers is quite distinct. The basal, keratinocyte cells are columnar in
shape, are found in the deepest layer of the viable epidermis, and divide and migrate upward
to eventually replace the corneocyte cells. The entire process from cell birth to the
“desquamation” of the corneocyte cells takes three to four weeks. The cells in the stratum
spinosum are more polygonal shaped and have spinelike projections that cross intercellular
spaces and form desmosomes and tight junctions. It is within these cells that keratin synthesis
is initiated. In the stratum granulosum, the cells begin to flatten and the major organelles
(including the mitochondria and nucleus) begin to degenerate. The stratum corneum
represents the skin’s uppermost “horny layer” that consists of dead, keratin-filled corneocytes.
Elias and Friend DS (31–35) have proposed a model for the stratum corneum, known as
the “brick and mortar” model. The rigid, keratin-filled corneocytes are the bricks, and the
intercellular lipids are the mortar. The intercellular lipids, along with lectins, desmosomes, and

=== Page 109 ===
corneodesmosomes, bind to corneocytes that help to hold them in place (36). It is the physical
arrangement of corneocytes and lipids, which enables the skin to resist high transepidermal
water loss (TEWL) and prevent foreign microbial and chemical entities from gaining entry into
the body.
Natural Moisturizing Factor
In addition to keratin, which can bind a substantial amount of water, the stratum corneum
contains a number of other hydrophilic agents listed in Table 2. These materials are called
natural moisturizing factors (NMF) (37–39). The NMF constitute about 20% to 30% dry
weight of the stratum corneum (40) and are found intracellularly as well as extracellularly
Table 1
Main Functions of the Skin
Functions of the skin
Activity
Protective shield
Protects body from mechanical insult, chemical penetration, germ
invasion, and UV radiation
Barrier to water loss and foreign
body penetration
Prevents the evaporation of excess water and thwarts the penetration of
chemicals and pathogens
Temperature regulator
Contains sweat ducts that modulate body temperature
Detoxification system
Because skin continuously desquamates, it provides an avenue for the
body to eliminate toxins
Early defense system
Langerhan cells capture and transfer foreign material (e.g., viruses and
bacteria) to the lymph nodes for their safe removal from the body
Sensory organ
The presence of nerve endings and Merkel cells enables the sense of
touch
Appearance
The skin defines a person’s physical appearance
Wound repair
Natural restorative response to repairing tissue damage
Abbreviation: UV, ultraviolet.
Figure 1
Schematic diagram of the skin’s major epidermal layers. Source: From Refs. 10 and 30.
Table 2
Composition of Natural Moisturizing Factor
Components
Mole percent (%)
Amino acids
40.0
Sodium pyrrolidone carboxylic acid
12.0
Lactate
12.0
Urea
7.0
Ions (e.g., Cl, Naþ, Kþ, Ca2þ, Mg2þ, PO4
3)
18.5
Sugars
8.5
Ammonia, uric acid, glucosamine, creatine
1.5
Citrate and formate
0.5
Source: From Refs. 18 and 25.
92
Kilpatrick-Liverman et al.

=== Page 110 ===
[e.g., sugars, hyaluronic acid (HA), urea, and lactate] (41). The major contributors to the
intracellular NMF are basic amino acids and their derivatives, such as pyrrolidone carboxylic
and urocanic acid, comprising up to 50% weight of the total NMF. The NMF concentration
varies as a function of age and skin depth (20). Harding et al. report that for healthy skin, not
exposed to surfactant damage, the NMF content is independent of depth until one approaches
the filaggrin-containing levels of the skin (20). In the deeper stratum corneum layers of older
individuals (50–65 years), the NMF concentration is low. This observation is a reflection of the
skin’s diminished ability to degrade filaggrin.
Because the NMF are effective humectants, they have a positive impact on the
biochemical and mechanical properties of the stratum corneum. I.H. Blank communicated the
importance of maintaining effective concentrations of water in the stratum corneum to prevent
or reduce skin tightness, cracking, scaling, and flaking (12,14). In addition to enhancing the
skin’s water content, the NMF improve skin plasticity due to specific interactions with keratin.
The NMF reduce the mobility of water as well as intermolecular forces between the keratin
fibers (42). Neutral and basic amino acids appear to be the major contributors to the
plasticization process. Removal of the soluble NMF can occur during water rinsing and
cleansing (43). Mild cleansing systems should thus be used to minimize the NMF removal.
Most amino acid–based NMF (and their derivatives, pyrrolidone carboxylic and urocanic
acid) are derived by the enzymatic hydrolysis (proteolysis) of the protein, filaggrin, and to a
lesser extent by the hydrolysis of corneodesmosomes (17,44–46). Filaggrin is a protein found in
the stratum granulosum layer. It is derived from the 500 kDa, highly basic profilaggrin protein
found in the keratohyalin granules of the epidermis. Profilaggrin is degraded to filaggrin (via a
dephosphorylation process) in the uppermost layers of the viable epidermis. Because
profilaggrin is osmotically inactive, the skin has engineered a process to protect the water-rich
epidermal cells from osmotic pressure–induced lysis (17). Conversely, the ability of filaggrin to
degrade into the components of the NMF in the stratum corneum makes it possible for the
outermost skin layers to maintain an adequate water supply when exposed to dry environments.
The breakdown of filaggrin is strictly controlled by the water activity (1,18,47). On the basis of in
vitro experiments, the degradation of filaggrin only occurs when the water activities are between
0.7 and 0.95. At higher activities, no breakdown occurs (48). At lower activities, the proteolytic
enzymes are inactivated, and the desquamation process ceases. Consequently, when the skin is
occluded (or when the relative humidity is high), there is minimal breakdown of filaggrin. Drier
conditions lead to an increase in proteolytic activity, resulting in the production of more NMF. A
mechanism is thus present that ensures adequate water content in the skin layer most influenced
by changes in environmental conditions or chemical insult.
Using tape-stripping methods (49,50) and confocal Raman spectroscopy (43), investigators
have shown that the concentration of NMF declines substantially as one approaches the stratum
granulosum. This is consistent with the fact that filaggrin degradation begins in the stratum
compactum, the lowest region of the stratum corneum. Given the higher water content, one
expects that low amounts of NMF would be formed near the stratum granulosum/stratum
corneum border. As the concentration of water decreases in the upper stratum corneum, an
enhanced degradation of filaggrin occurs. Surprisingly, Egawa and Tagami reported no changes
in the concentration of NMF (other than lactic acid and urea, which could have been produced
via sweating) as a function of season (51). The only correlation was the panelist’s subjective
feeling of “not feeling dry” and higher amounts of NMF. In this same report, younger Japanese
individuals (mean age: 32 years) had a lower amount of NMF versus older individuals (mean
age: 67 years). This result was attributed to the faster stratum corneum turnover of the younger
age group. Unlike what was reported previously (20), these authors showed a high amount of
NMF at the skin surface that decreased as a function of depth. Typically, the uppermost layer of
the stratum corneum has a lower NMF content than the mid–stratum corneum presumably
because cleansers remove the surface material.
Some NMF behave as simple humectants and have other functions. Lactate and
potassium, for example, affect the pH and stiffness of the stratum corneum (52). The L-isomer
of lactic acid also stimulates ceramide biosynthesis and improves barrier function (53).
Two additional NMF, HA (54) and glycerol, have also been found in the stratum
corneum. HA, a nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan, is a hygroscopic polymer of repeating
disaccharide units of N-acetylglucosamine and glucuronic acid. It is a well-known component
of the dermis, maintaining its hydrated state and providing structural integrity. In the stratum
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
93

=== Page 111 ===
corneum, it not only functions as a humectant but also interacts with the intercellular lipids
and regulates the mechanical properties of the stratum corneum.
Glycerol may be derived from the breakdown of sebaceous triglycerides or originate
from the conversion of phospholipids to free fatty acids. The importance of glycerol was
revealed in a study completed by Fluhr et al. (55). These authors employed mice models where
sebaceous glands (which produce triglycerides that degrade to glycerol) were largely absent
and showed that although the permeability barrier responded to mechanical abrasion similar
to the control, skin hydration was only enhanced by the addition of glycerol. Like HA, glycerol
also influences the skin’s pliability by interacting with skin lipids. Froebe et al. (56) and Mattai
et al. (57) showed how glycerol could modulate the phase behavior of intercellular lipids
favoring a more pliable, liquid crystalline structure at low relative humidities.
Stratum Corneum Lipids
Stratum corneum lipids play a major role in maintaining skin hydration. These intercellular
lipids comprise approximately 40% to 50% ceramides, 20% to 25% cholesterol, 15% to 25% fatty
acids (that have chain lengths between 16 and 30 carbons, C24:0–C28:0 being the most
abundant), and 5% to 10% cholesterol sulfate; the approximate molar ratios of these lipids are
1:1:1 (ceramide: fatty acid: cholesterol) (58–60). They represent about 15% of the dry weight of
the stratum corneum (61). These intercellular lipids are arranged in a highly organized
lamellar arrangement (or bilayer) with only very small amounts of water present, presumably
interacting with the lipid polar head groups (62). This compact lamellar structure is a very
effective barrier to the TEWL. When the skin is exposed to solvents such as toluene, n-hexane,
or carbon tetrachloride, which remove barrier lipids, the TEWL is increased (63). The
ceramides are major components of the intercellular lipids, and this is reflected in their
contribution to the structural organization of the lamellar bilayer. There are about nine major
ceramides, which are synthesized from glucosylceramides, epidermosides (acylglucosylcer-
amides), and sphingomyelin (64). These ceramides have complex structures varying in both
their polar head groups and dual hydrophobic chains (Fig. 2) (65). Each ceramide contributes
in specific ways to stratum corneum organization and cohesion and thus to the integrity of the
barrier. In particular, the o-hydroxyacyl portion of ceramide EOS (Fig. 2) completely spans a
lamellar bilayer and the linoleate tail is believed to intercalate between a closely apposed
bilayer, essentially linking two bilayers together (60,66). In fact, when any of the acylceramides
is extracted, the periodicity of the lamellar bilayer structure is eliminated (67).
Figure 2 lists the structure and names of the nine identified ceramides. The ceramide
(CER)-naming nomenclature was proposed by Motta et al. (68). Ceramides are designated:
CER FB, where F is the type of fatty acid and B is the type of base. N represents normal fatty
acids; A stands for a-hydroxy fatty acids; O represents o-hydroxy fatty acids; and E represents
ester linked linoleic acid. S, P, and H represent sphingosines, phytosphingosines, and 6-
hydroxysphingosine, respectively.
Lipid Organization and Structural Models
Electron diffraction studies (69) have shown that as corneocytes migrate from the lower regions of
the stratum corneum to the outer layers, there is a corresponding change in lipid packing from a
more ordered, orthorhombic packing to a more fluid hexagonal phase. This observation is
consistent with the known weakening of the barrier and complete loss of lamellar ordering in the
topmost layers of the stratum corneum (70–72). Changes in the composition of the stratum
corneum lipids in the upper stratum corneum (i.e., increased concentration of cholesterol sulfate,
hydrolysis of CER EOS, increased concentration of short–chain length fatty acids, crystallization
of cholesterol, and decreased levels of ceramides) presumably influence the loss of lamellar order
(71). Indeed, factors that can affect lipid composition, such as washing with harsh cleansers,
perturb the lamellar structure and adversely change the condition of the skin (72).
There are several models that have been proposed to describe the structural phases of the
lipid bilayer (Table 3). The domain mosaic model suggests that lipids coexist as a mixture of
liquid crystalline and gel phases (73). The more ordered gel phase allows for greater packing of
the lipids and hence a more effective barrier.
X-ray diffraction studies of hydrated stratum corneum have shown two types of lamellar
structures, having repeat distances of 13.2 to 13.4 nm (long periodicity phase) and 6.0 to 6.4 nm
(short periodicity phase) (62,74). Bouwstra et al. (75) have proposed a molecular arrangement
94
Kilpatrick-Liverman et al.

=== Page 112 ===
of the long periodicity phase, called the sandwich model, consisting of two broad lipid layers
of about 5 nm each, with a crystalline structure separated by a narrow central lipid layer of
about 3 nm with fluid domains. Cholesterol and ceramides are important for the formation of
the lamellar phase, while fatty acids mostly impact the lateral packing of the lipids.
L. Norlen has proposed yet a third skin barrier model (76). This model suggests that the
lipid matrix has a homogeneous lamellar gel phase with a low degree of lipid fluidity. Stratum
corneum epidermal lipid heterogeneity, the long length of the fatty acids chains, and the
presence of cholesterol are used to support this model since these factors have been shown to
stabilize gel phases (77,78). This model does not require the presence of water or any bilayer
conformation.
Figure 2
Chemical structure of stratum corneum ceramide lipids. The depicted ceramide naming, CER FB, was
proposed by Motta et al. (68). F refers to the type of fatty acid and B to the type of base. N represents normal fatty
acids; A stands for a-hydroxy fatty acids; O represents o-hydroxy fatty acids; and E represents ester linked linoleic
acid. S, P, and H represent sphingosines, phytosphingosines and 6-hydroxysphingosine, respectively.
Table 3
Proposed Models Describing How Barrier Lipids Structure Within Stratum Corneum
Skin barrier model
Description
Domain mosaic
Stratum corneum barrier lipids coexist in liquid crystalline (water permeable) and
highly ordered gel phase (water impermeable) domains. Water is expected to be
most permeable at the phase boundaries. The more fluid crystalline phase
allows for the permeation of water.
Sandwich model
Proposes a more structured arrangement of liquid crystalline and gel domains. A
narrow central lipid layer with fluid domains (3 nm wide) lies between two broad,
crystalline lipid layers (6.4 nm wide).
Single–gel phase model
Skin barrier lipids exist as a single lamellar gel phase with no phase boundaries.
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
95

=== Page 113 ===
There are also different models describing the mechanism of skin barrier formation. The
Landmann model suggests that “lamellar bodies” or stacked monobilayer vesicles separate from
the trans-Golgi network, extrude into the intercellular space at the stratum granulosum/stratum
corneum border, fuse with the cell plasma membrane of the stratum granulosum, and discharge
the lipids into continuous multilamellar membrane sheets in the intercellular space (79). The
membrane-folding model (80–82) argues against abrupt changes in lipid phase transitions that
would result from the disruption, diffusion, and fusion of the lamellar bodies. On the basis of
this model, the skin barrier formation takes place as a direct, continuous unfolding of a three-
dimensional membrane into a flat, multilayered two-dimensional lipid structure (having only
hexagonal hydrocarbon chain packing and no abrupt phase transitions) (80,81). By evaluating
vitreous sections of non-pretreated, non-stained, full-thickness, hydrated, skin, using cryo-
transmission electron microscopy, cubic-like membrane structures were observed. This
organizational pathway was proposed to be more thermodynamically preferred to that
previously described by Landmann (79). The cryo-transmission electron microscopy preparation
was also reported to be improved over conventional electron microscopy methods because it
does not require dehydration and chemical fixation of the sample. With additional innovations
in instruments and instrumental techniques, active research will be sure to continue in this area.
Lamellar Lipid Arrangement and Water Permeability
The lamellar or bilayer arrangement, independent of the nature of the lipids from which it is
derived, is a natural barrier to water permeability (83). In the skin, there is a relatively large
gradient in water chemical potential between the viable epidermis, where the water content is
about 70% by weight, and the stratum granulosum/stratum corneum junction, where the water
content drops to 15% to 30% (84). Under this large water gradient, the stacked bilayer
arrangement of lipids, which is a continuous region in the stratum corneum, provides an optimal
way to reduce water loss through the skin. Water escaping from the stratum corneum would
have to traverse the tortuous pathway of the bilayer (73,85). In addition, fully matured
corneocytes would also increase the tortuosity and hence the diffusional path length of water (19).
The combination of a lamellar arrangement of lipids and increased diffusional path length due to
corneocytes reduce water diffusion to the atmosphere.
AQUAPORINS AND TIGHT JUNCTIONS
Another mechanism by which the skin maintains its hydrated state is the use of AQPs. These
transmembrane proteins form water channels across cell membranes, facilitating the transport
of small polar molecules across the cell membrane. Specific AQPs also have the ability to
facilitate the transport of glycerol and urea. AQP3 is most relevant to skin hydration (19).
AQP3 is localized in the basal and suprabasal layers of the epidermis, and is not expressed in
the stratum corneum. In AQP3-deficient mouse skin, the skin is less hydrated, less elastic, the
permeability of water and glycerol within the skin is reduced, and there is a delayed barrier
recovery (86–88). Only by adding glycerol does the condition of the skin improve (89). Skin
diseases associated with impaired barriers and low skin hydration also tend to have reduced
expression of AQP3. Boury-Jamot et al. found that AQP3 expression was inversely correlated
to the severity of patients with eczema and spongiosis (90).
Tight junctions consist of more than 40 transmembrane [i.e., claudins, occludin, and
junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs)] and plaque proteins (zonula occludens) (91). This
protein combination forms a semipermeable barrier between aligning cell membranes, making
it very difficult for water to pass through the space between the epidermal cells. Ions or fluids
must actually diffuse or be actively transported through the cell to pass through the tissue.
Claudins, occludins, and JAMs are principally responsible for controlling water permeability.
Claudin 1–deficient mice die within one day of birth because of excessive TEWL (92). The
presence of organized tight junctions and an intact stratum corneum barrier ensures low
values of TEWL. For those diseases due to which patients experience dry skin and a
compromised barrier (e.g., psoriasis vulgaris and ichthyosis vulgaris), the location of tight-
junction proteins may also be altered. Proteins that may be expressed homogeneously
throughout the epidermis may be preferentially expressed in the upper or lower layers.
96
Kilpatrick-Liverman et al.

=== Page 114 ===
DESQUAMATION
So far, the above discussion has centered on natural ways in which the human skin has evolved
to retain water. In addition to hydrating the skin, water also plays a crucial role in the exfoliation
or desquamation of corneocytes. Corneocytes are linked in the lower stratum corneum by
corneodesmosomes, which are macromolecular glycoprotein complexes. As the corneocytes
move from the lower to the outer region of the stratum corneum, the corneodesmosomes are
progressively degraded by hydrolytic enzymes. This leads to desquamation in the outer stratum
corneum. These enzymes include serine proteases such as stratum corneum chymotryptic
enzyme (SCCE) and stratum corneum tryptic-like enzyme (SCTE), which are more effective at
neutral pHs and are most active on the outermost layers of the stratum corneum (19,47,93–95).
The cathepsin family of proteases is more active under lower pH conditions and are present
throughout the stratum corneum. Other proteases include cysteine proteases, sulfatases, and
glycosidases. Many of these enzymes are localized in the intercellular space, and their activity is
affected by both the lipid organization and water content (20,96). Clearly, low water content
within the stratum corneum affects the activities of stratum corneum proteases, which leads to
dry, flaky skin. Recently, these changes have been studied as a function of season, anatomical
site, and skin depth (97). To maintain these processes, in vitro results suggest that optimally
hydrated skin requires water content between 10% and 20% (13).
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ON SKIN HYDRATION
Changes in lipid biosynthesis (71,98), epidermal DNA synthesis (9), barrier function (99), and
skin thickness (100) are all influenced by the skin’s water content. There are many studies
showing that biochemical processes are also altered as a function of changes in the
environmental relative humidity (101,102). Rawlings et al. demonstrated that dry conditions
inhibit corneodesmosomal degradation, while increasing humidity increases corneodesmoso-
mal degradation (103). Moreover, when the human skin was exposed to low humidity
conditions (10%) even for short exposure periods (3 and 6 hours), a significant decrease in
water content of the stratum corneum and increase in skin roughness was observed (3).
Even in humid conditions, the skin is still subject to a number of environmental insults
that can negatively affect skin hydration. Excess UV radiation, for example, causes UV-
induced erythema leading to a compromised barrier (104). Several animal studies have
demonstrated that abrupt changes in the environment, such as going from humid (80% relative
humidity) to dry (less than 10% relative humidity) conditions, increases the time required for
barrier function to return to normal (99). In this situation, the skin does not have enough time
to adapt to the new climatic conditions. Declercq et al. have further demonstrated that skin can
adapt to dry climatic conditions (5). They found that the panelists living in a hot, dry climate
such as Arizona had a better barrier function and less dry skin compared with the panelists
living in New York, which had a more humid climate (5).
While prolonged exposure to conditions of low relative humidity (<20%) enhance barrier
function, sustained exposure to high-humidity conditions leads to a gradual deterioration in
the barrier (1). A relative humidity greater than 80% is associated with a decrease in NMF and
corneocyte hydration in the epidermis of hairless mice (1). It has also been shown that when
normal skin is exposed to a moist environment, the kinetics of barrier recovery is delayed
because of a reduction in the number of epidermal lamellar bodies and lipid content, in direct
contrast with what is observed at low humidities (102). Therefore, when the skin adapts to a
high-humidity environment, its capacity to respond to external changes is decreased, partially
because of a reduction in the reservoir of stratum corneum lipids.
It is remarkable that a human fetus has a mechanism to protect the outermost skin barrier
to the damaging effects of amniotic fluid, an environment that would result in a loss of barrier
function in adults (105). During the third trimester of gestation, a biofilm known as vernix
caseosa forms and coats the prenatal skin. This film acts as a barrier and facilitates the
formation of the acid mantle, which provides an optimal environment for inhibiting bacterial
colonization (106,107). Vernix caseosa consists of *80% water, 10% protein (corneocytes with
no desmosomal attachments), and 10% lipids by weight (consisting of barrier and sebaceous
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
97

=== Page 115 ===
lipids not arranged in any lamellar structure). This material has been shown to have multiple
functions, besides being an efficient moisturizer and osmoregulator (108). On the basis of
transmission electron microscope images, the limited structure of vernix caseosa is very similar
to that of the topmost layers of the stratum corneum. The body appears to have retained this
structural feature of vernix caseosa during the course of stratum corneum maturation.
PERSONAL CARE PRODUCTS AND SKIN HYDRATION
The Effect of Cleansing Systems
Cleansers are designed to remove unwanted materials from the skin such as dirt, oils, and
sebum. However, the use of harsh surfactants damages the skin barrier; increases the skin’s
susceptibility to environmental sources of irritation and sensitization; and reduces skin
moisture and smoothness (109). Charged surfactants, such as anionic and cationic, are the most
aggressive. Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) is a harsh surfactant that, given its small hydro-
dynamic radius, is the only surfactant that can extract the intercellular lipids and disrupt the
lipid bilayer (110). It, along with most of the charged surfactants, adsorb skin proteins, causing
them to denature and swell. Rhein et al. reported that the extent of protein denaturation is
dependent on the surfactant monomer concentration and exposure time (111). As surfactants
denature skin proteins, enzymatic reactions that control desquamation, inflammation, and
oxidation processes are negatively impacted (112,113). The resulting enhanced barrier
permeability leads to skin dryness, roughness, cracking, and inflammation (10,47,114).
Fortunately, there are a number of surfactants used commercially that are mild to the
skin. These include mostly nonionic and amphoteric variants and the anionic variants: highly
ethoxylated (at least 5-EO) alkyl sulfates, sulfosuccinates, isethionates, sarcosinates, taurates,
alkyl phosphates, and alkyl glutamates. The aggressiveness of charged surfactants can be
mitigated by reducing the concentration of the surfactant’s monomer species, reducing the
charge by incorporating various counterions and/or cosurfactants to form mixed micelles, and
introducing ethoxylation (10). The improved mildness reduces the incidence of barrier
damage, which aids in the maintenance of hydrated skin (i.e., nondrying cleansers).
Surfactants also negatively impact the skin hydration properties by removing NMF.
Blank and Shappirio (14) showed that when isolated human stratum corneum was exposed
to 1% solutions of soap, alkyl sulfate or alkyl benzylsulfonate, all surfactants reduced the
ability of the tissue to absorb water from the atmosphere, relative to water. This water-holding
capacity is correlated with the loss of NMF. A similar correlation has been found
between natural saponified soaps and mild synthetic surfactants using confocal Raman
spectroscopy (115) (Fig. 3).
There has been a great deal of research focused on delivering enhanced skin
moisturization using cleansers (109). Emollient-containing cleansers have been found to
alleviate the dry skin condition of people having rosecea, sensitive skin, and/or atopic
dermatitis (116,117). Emulsion-based liquid body washes are commonly employed to mildly
Figure 3
Water content as a function of cleanser
type determined using confocal Raman spectros-
copy. Source: From Ref. 115.
98
Kilpatrick-Liverman et al.

=== Page 116 ===
cleanse and moisturize the skin. Although delivering a moisturization benefit using lipophilic
agents is difficult to achieve in a rinse-off system, clinical studies have confirmed that
enhanced moisturization can be achieved in formulas containing a large quantity of oils and/
or humectants (118). The patent literature is replete (but will not be further discussed in this
chapter) with examples of approaches to improve the delivery of actives from cleansing
systems. Invariably, it has been demonstrated that cleansing systems are able to remove dirt
and bacteria while simultaneously depositing oils on the skin to improve skin feel, smooth
desquamating corneocytes, and improve barrier function.
Research has demonstrated that oatmeal is a good choice for gentle cleansing and
moisturizing dry, sensitive skin (119). Oatmeal has been used for centuries as a soothing agent
to relieve itch and irritation associated with various xerotic dermatoses. Many clinical
properties of colloidal oatmeal are derived from its chemical polymorphism. Its high-
concentration of starches and b-glucan is responsible for the protective and water-holding
functions of oat. The presence of different types of phenols confers antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory activity. Some of the oat phenols are also strong UV absorbers. The cleansing
activity of oat is mostly due to saponins. Many of its functional properties make colloidal
oatmeal a good cleanser, moisturizer, buffer, as well as a soothing and protective anti-
inflammatory agent (120).
Although cleansers have been formulated to successfully deliver oils to the skin,
delivering humectants has been more challenging. Humectants are highly water soluble and,
consequently, harder to deposit onto the skin during the washing process. Special delivery
systems have yet to be developed to improve the competency in this area.
Moisturizing the stratum corneum using lotions and creams is typically the best way to
hydrate the skin. This is typically accomplished by using emulsion formulas, which contain
humectants, emollients, and/or occlusive agents (121). Humectants attract and hold on to
water. Occlusive agents form a barrier across the skin, reducing the TEWL. “Emollient” comes
from a Latin derivation meaning a material designed to soften and soothe the skin (122).
Emollients can be occlusive or semiocclusive meaning they may not be very effective at
preventing evaporative water loss, but are effective in smoothing skin.
Glycerol and urea are well-known humectants (123–125). Glycerol also prevents the
crystallization of stratum corneum lipids at low relative humidity, which leads to less TEWL
and higher water content of the skin. Previous studies evaluated the influence of glycerol on
the recovery of damaged stratum corneum induced by repeated washings with SLS. The
authors found that glycerol created a stimulus for barrier repair and improved stratum
corneum hydration (126).
Petrolatum is a common occlusive agent. Application of hydrophobic materials such as
petrolatum to prevent skin dryness may be as old as mankind itself. In recent times, however,
manufacturers are incorporating lipids that can form lamellar bilayers in their formulations to
enhance the barrier properties of the skin (127,128). They typically use ceramides or ceramide-
like molecules to accomplish this goal and have found even greater benefit when they combine
the lipid technology with glycerol (129). Niacinamide has also been shown to enhance lipid
biosynthesis, which again improves barrier function (130). As in the above situation, the
addition of glycerol further improves the clinical dry-skin condition.
Water in Excess
Skin exposure to extrinsic water is usually considered to be harmless. Often times it is used as
the “control” site in experiments that investigate the way compounds interact with the skin.
However, there is evidence that prolonged contact with water can negatively affect SC barrier
function, similar to surfactants (131). In addition to eliciting erythema, inflammation, and
intense dermatitis, excess water exposure can increase SC swelling and suppleness, weaken SC
corneocyte cohesion, and increase the permeability of all substances, especially water. Warner
et al. (114,131) showed that overexposure of skin to water causes a disruption of the SC
intercellular lamellar bilayer ultrastructure in vitro as well as in vivo. Similar to surfactant
exposure, the swelling response was time dependent, and wide intracellular clefts between
corneocytes were observed. These studies as well as others show that prolonged hydration of
the SC can directly disrupt the barrier lipids, leading to compromised skin (114,131,132).
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
99

=== Page 117 ===
DIETARY IMPACT ON SKIN CONDITION
It is generally stated that topically applied cosmetic products can be helpful in restoring
normal hydration to dry skin. However, less recognized is the positive influence that drinking
plenty of water can have on the skin’s appearance. Approximately 45% to 70% of human body
weight consists of water. One-third of the total body water is extracellular, and two-thirds are
within the intracellular compartment (133). Water is free to move between the cell membranes
with any net movement controlled by the effective osmotic and hydrostatic pressures. This
balance of body fluid is dependent on the intake of water through drinking, food, and
metabolism and the loss of water through natural processes. The three components of the skin,
the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous fat tissue, play a major role in water regulation, with
the SC water content helping to maintain many of the skin’s biophysical properties (134). Soft,
smooth skin has an optimally hydrated SC with a water content of approximately 20% to 30%,
and a water content of less than 10% to 20%, resulting in abnormally dry skin (133,134). While
the environment can play a role in TEWL, a good balance between water intake and loss is
vastly important in helping to maintain healthy water content in the SC, which has a positive
influence on skin hydration.
An increased intake of pure, healthy water helps to enhance nutrient absorption, skin
hydration, detoxification, and virtually every aspect of better health. However, studies have
also shown that drinking dietary natural mineral water or taking a food supplement
containing pro-hydrating actives maintains adequate skin hydration as well. Mac-Mary et al.
(135) showed that the magnitude of change in a Corneometer1 measurement on the forearm of
healthy subjects increased by 14% when 1 L of mineral water was consumed per day for
42 days, which was clinically significant and similar to the observed modifications with
moisturizing cosmetic products (10–30%). Primavera and Berardesca (133) investigated how a
capsule containing an active product based on vegetable ceramides, amino acids, sea fish
cartilage, antioxidants, and essential fatty acids improved skin hydration after oral use.
Significant improvement in Corneometer readings were seen in the active-treated groups
(þ30%), in addition to a decrease in skin roughness and improved skin smoothness after
40 days, as measured using a VisioScan1. Self- and clinical-assessment data confirmed the
results of the biophysical measurements. These studies demonstrate that a proper diet with
adequate water and mineral intake is just as important in the management of skin hydration as
a complementary cosmetic approach. Puch et al. further showed that ingesting a probiotic-
containing dairy product enriched in g-linolenic acid (an o-6-polyunsaturated fatty acid that
has been shown to enhance the rate of barrier recovery when applied topically and when taken
orally), vitamin E, and catechins improved barrier function after six weeks of taking twice a
day dosage. The average improvement was 13% (136). The reduction in TEWL was observed
throughout the six-month study, despite the changes in season.
SUMMARY
Maintaining hydration of the stratum corneum can be accomplished using a number of
different mechanisms. From using mild surfactants that minimally compromise the skin
barrier to delivering moisturizers (humectants, occlusive oils, and lipid modulating agents),
these materials offer a means of adding moisture back to the skin or, alternatively, reducing
water loss (137,138). The skin itself, in fact, has a natural process to minimize excess water loss.
Through the water-dependent production of intercellular skin lipids and NMF, an intricate
mechanism is in place to function optimally in an often arid, external environment. The skin is
a remarkable organ, producing vernix caseosa to protect (as a barrier, anti-infective and
antioxidant) the fetus while it is immersed in amniotic fluid, a potential damaging
environment, and following birth enhancing the acid mantle development, which facilitates
skin maturation during the postnatal period. The production of urocanic acid and free
fatty acids in the stratum corneum further contributes to the regulation of stratum corneum
pH (139,140). As for those living in dry climates, the skin is adaptable and can generate
an improved barrier function and increased water content. The development of the confocal
Raman spectrometer has allowed researchers to noninvasively monitor the skin’s
water content and composition changes as a function of the environment and product use
100
Kilpatrick-Liverman et al.

=== Page 118 ===
(43,141–143). The identification of AQPs and tight junctions provides increasing evidence for
internal mechanisms that the skin is using to improve the opportunities for corneocyte
hydration. More importantly, there is increasing data confirming the importance of
maintaining an optimal skin’s water content to insure the activity of processes that occur in
the epidermis. Protecting and maintaining an adequate water content and barrier function of
the skin are proving to be essential to achieving healthy, youthful-looking skin.
REFERENCES
1. Scott IR, Harding CR. Filaggrin breakdown to water binding compounds during development of
the rat stratum corneum is controlled by the water activity of the environment. Dev Biol 1986; 115(1):
84–92.
2. Tsukahara K, Hotta M, Fujimura T, et al. Effect of room humidity on the formation of fine wrinkles
in the facial skin of Japanese. Skin Res Technol 2007; 13(2):184–188.
3. Egawa M, Oguri M, Kuwahara T, et al. Effect of exposure of human skin to a dry environment. Skin
Res Technol 2002; 8(4):212–218.
4. Imokawa G, Takema Y. Fine wrinkle formation: etiology and prevention. Cosmet Toiletries 1993;
108:65–77.
5. Declercq L, Muizzuddin N, Hellemans L, et al. Adaptation response in human skin barrier to a hot
and dry environment (abstract). J Invest Dermatol 2002; 119:716.
6. Blank IH. Cutaneous barriers. J Invest Dermatol 1965; 45(4):249–256.
7. Tagami H, Kobayashi H, Zhen XS, et al. Environmental effects on the functions of the stratum
corneum. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 2001; 6(1):87–94.
8. Fore-Pflinger J. The epidermal skin barrier: implications for the wound care practitioner, Part I. Adv
Skin and Wound Care 2004; 17:417–425.
9. Denda M, Sato J, Tsuchiya T, et al. Low humidity stimulates epidermal DNA synthesis and amplifies
the hyperproliferative response to barrier disruption: implication for seasonal exacerbations of
inflammatory dermatoses. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111(5):873–878.
10. Polefka T. Surfactant interactions with skin. In: Broze G, ed. Handbook of Detergents. New York:
Marcel Dekker, 1999:433–468.
11. Pearse AD, Gaskell SA, Marks R. Epidermal changes in human skin following irradiation with either
UVB or UVA. J Invest Dermatol 1987; 88(1):83–87.
12. Blank IH. Factors which influence the water content of the stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1952;
18(6):433–440.
13. Blank IH. Further observations on factors which influence the water content of the stratum corneum.
J Invest Dermatol 1953; 21(4):259–271.
14. Blank IH, Shappirio EB. The water content of the stratum corneum. III. Effect of previous contact
with aqueous solutions of soaps and detergents. J Invest Dermatol 1955; 25(6):391–401.
15. Abrams K, Harvell JD, Shriner D, et al. Effect of organic solvents on in vitro human skin water
barrier function. J Invest Dermatol 1993; 101(4):609–613.
16. Elias P, Wood L, Feingold K. Epidermal pathogenesis of inflammatory dermatoses. Am J Contact
Dermat 1999; 10(3):119–126.
17. Rawlings AV, Scott IR, Harding CR, et al. Stratum corneum moisturization at the molecular level.
J Invest Dermatol 1994; 103(5):731–741.
18. Rawlings AV, Harding CR. Moisturization and skin barrier function. Dermatol Ther 2004; 17(suppl 1):
43–48.
19. Rawlings AV, Matts PJ. Stratum corneum moisturization at the molecular level: an update in relation
to the dry skin cycle. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 124(6):1099–1110.
20. Harding CR, Watkinson A, Rawlings AV, et al. Dry skin, moisturization and corneodesmolysis. Int
J Cosmet Sci 2000; 22:21–52.
21. Harding CR. The stratum corneum: structure and function in health and disease. Dermatol Ther
2004; 17(suppl 1):6–15.
22. Matts PJ, Rawlings AV. The dry skin cycle. In: Cosmetic Science and Technology Series 30,
New York: Taylor and Francis, 2006:79–114.
23. Elias PM. The epidermal permeability barrier: from the early days at Harvard to emerging concepts.
J Invest Dermatol 2004; 122(2):xxxvi–xxxix.
24. Madison KC, Sando GN, Howard EJ, et al. Lamellar granule biogenesis: a role for ceramide
glucosyltransferase, lysosomal enzyme transport, and the Golgi. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 1998;
3(2):80–86.
25. Verdier-Sevrain S, Bonte F. Skin hydration: a review on its molecular mechanisms. J Cosmet
Dermatol 2007; 6(2):75–82.
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
101

=== Page 119 ===
26. Zhen YX, Suetake T, Tagami H. Number of cell layers of the stratum corneum in normal skin-
relationship to the anatomical location on the body, age, sex, and physical parameters. Arch
Dermatol Res 1991; 291:555–559.
27. Kalinin AE, Kajava AV, Steinert PM. Epithelial barrier function: assembly and structural features of
the cornified cell envelope. Bioessays 2002; 24(9):789–800.
28. Reichert U, Michel S, Schimdt R. The cornified envelope: a key structure of terminally differentiating
keratinocytes. In: Darmon M, Blumenberg M, eds. Molecular Biology of the Skin. London: Academic
Press, 1993:107–150.
29. Gasser P, Lati E, Dumas M. Induction of Aquaporine 3 expression and filaggrin degradation in
human epidermis after skin barrier disruption. 34th Annual European Society of Dermatological
Research Meeting. Vienna, Austria, 2004, September 9–11.
30. Parker F. Structure and function of the skin. In: Orkin M, Maibach H, Dahl MV, eds. Dermatology.
Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1991:1–7.
31. Elias PM. Structure and function of the stratum corneum permeability barrier. Drug Dev Res 1988;
13:97–105.
32. Elias PM. Epidermal lipids, barrier function and desquamation. J Invest Dermatol 1983; 80:44–49.
33. Elias PM. Lipids and the epidermal permeability barrier. Arch Dermatol Res 1981; 270(1):95–117.
34. Elias PM, Friend DS. The permeability barrier in mammalian epidermis. J Cell Biol 1975; 65(1):
180–191.
35. Elias PM. The stratum corneum revisited. J Dermatol 1996; 23(11):756–758.
36. Swartzendruber DC, Wertz PW, Madison KC, et al. Evidence that the corneocyte has a chemically
bound lipid envelope. J Invest Dermatol 1987; 88(6):709–713.
37. Cler EJ, Fourtanier A. L’ acide pyrrolidone carboxylique (PCA) et la peau. Intl J Cosmet Sci 1981;
3:101–113.
38. Jacobi OK. Moisture regulation in the skin. Drug Cosmet Ind 1959; 84:732–812.
39. Tabachnick J, LaBadie JH. Studies on the biochemistry of epidermis. IV. The free amino acids,
ammonia, urea, and pyrrolidone carboxylic acid content of conventional and germ-free albino guina
pig epidermia. J Invest Dermatol 1970; 54(1):24–31.
40. Trianse SJ. The search for the ideal moisturizer. Cosmet Perfumery 1974; 89:57.
41. Harding CR, Bartolone J, Rawlings AV. Effects of natural moisturizing factor and lactic acid isomers
on skin function. In: Loden M, Maibach HI, eds. Dry Skin and Moisturizers: Chemistry and
Function. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2000; 229–314.
42. Jokura Y, Ishikawa S, Tokuda H, et al. Molecular analysis of elastic properties of the stratum
corneum by solid-state 13C-nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. J Invest Dermatol 1995;
104(5):806–812.
43. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Carter EA, et al. In vivo confocal Raman microspectroscopy of the skin:
noninvasive determination of molecular concentration profiles. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 116(3):
434–442.
44. Harding CR, Scott IR. Stratum corneum moisturizing factors. In: Leyden J, Rawlings A, eds.
New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 2002:61–80.
45. Scott IR, Harding CR. Studies on the synthesis and degradation of a high molecular weight,
histidine-rich phosphoprotein from mammalian epidermis. Biochim Biophys Acta 1981; 669(1):
65–78.
46. Scott IR, Harding CR, Barrett JG. Histidine-rich protein of the keratohyalin granules. Source of the
free amino acids, urocanic acid and pyrrolidone carboxylic acid in the stratum corneum. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1982; 719(1):110–117.
47. Watkinson A, Harding C, Moore A, et al. Water modulation of stratum corneum chymotryptic
enzyme activity and desquamation. Arch Dermatol Res 2001; 293(9):470–476.
48. Scott IR, Harding CR. Physiological effects of occlusion-filaggrin retention. Proc Dermatol 1993;
2000:285 (abstr 773).
49. Koyama J, Horii I, Kawasaki K, et al. Free amino acids of stratum corneum as a biochemical marker
to evaluate dry skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1984; 35:183–195.
50. Horii I, Nakayama Y, Obata M, et al. Stratum corneum hydration and amino acid content in xerotic
skin. Br J Dermatol 1989; 121(5):587–592.
51. Egawa M, Tagami H. Comparison of the depth profiles of water and water-binding substances in
the stratum corneum determined in vivo by Raman spectroscopy between the cheek and volar
forearm skin: effects of age, seasonal changes and artificial forced hydration. Br J Dermatol 2008;
158(2):251–260.
52. Nakagawa N, Sakai S, Matsumoto M, et al. Relationship between NMF (lactate and potassium)
content and the physical properties of the stratum corneum in healthy subjects. J Invest Dermatol
2004; 122(3):755–763.
102
Kilpatrick-Liverman et al.

=== Page 120 ===
53. Rawlings AV, Davies A, Carlomusto M, et al. Effect of lactic acid isomers on keratinocyte ceramide
synthesis, stratum corneum lipid levels and stratum corneum barrier function. Arch Dermatol Res
1996; 288(7):383–390.
54. Sakai S, Yasuda R, Sayo T, et al. Hyaluronan exists in the normal stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol
2000; 114(6):1184–1187.
55. Fluhr JW, Mao-Qiang M, Brown BE, et al. Glycerol regulates stratum corneum hydration in
sebaceous gland deficient (asebia) mice. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):728–737.
56. Froebe CL, Simion FA, Ohlmeyer H, et al. Prevention of stratum corneum lipid phas transitions in
vitro by glycerol-an alternative mechanism for skin moisturization. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1990; 41:51–65.
57. Mattai J, Froebe CL, Rhein LD, et al. Prevention of model stratum corneum lipid phase transitions in
vitro by cosmetic additives. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1983; 44:89–100.
58. Long SA, Wertz PW, Strauss JS, et al. Human stratum corneum polar lipids and desquamation. Arch
Dermatol Res 1985; 277(4):284–287.
59. Gary GM, White RJ, Yardley HJ. Lipid composition of the superficial stratum corneum cells of the
epidermis. Br J Dermatol 1982; 106:59–63.
60. Wertz P. Lipids and barrier function of the skin. Acta Derm Venereol 2000; 208:7–11.
61. Downing DT, Stewart ME. Epidermal composition. In: Loden M, Maibach HI, eds. Dry Skin and
Moisturizers: Chemistry and Function. New York: CRC Press, 2000:13–26.
62. Bouwstra JA, Gooris GS, van der Spek JA, et al. Structural investigations of human stratum corneum
by small-angle X-ray scattering. J Invest Dermatol 1991; 97(6):1005–1112.
63. Goldsmith LB, Friberg SE, Wahlberg JE. The effect of solvent extraction on the lipids of the stratum
corneum in relation to observed immediate whitening of the skin. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 19(5):
348–350.
64. Wertz PW, Miethke MC, Long SA, et al. The composition of the ceramides from human stratum
corneum and from comedones. J Invest Dermatol 1985; 84(5):410–412.
65. Ponec M, Weerheim A, Lankhorst P, et al. New acylceramide in native and reconstructed epidermis.
J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(4):581–588.
66. Wertz PW, Downing DT. Glycolipids in mammalian epidermis: structure and function in the water
barrier. Science 1982; 217(4566):1261–1262.
67. Bouwstra JA, Gooris GS, Dubbelaar FE, et al. Role of ceramide 1 in the molecular organization of the
stratum corneum lipids. J Lipid Res 1998; 39(1):186–196.
68. Motta S, Monti M, Sesana S, et al. Ceramide composition of the psoriatic scale. Biochim Biophys Acta
1993; 1182(2):147–151.
69. Pilgram GS, Engelsma-van Pelt AM, Bouwstra JA, et al. Electron diffraction provides new
information on human stratum corneum lipid organization studied in relation to depth and
temperature. J Invest Dermatol 1999; 113(3):403–409.
70. Berry N, Charmeil C, Goujon C, et al. A clinical biometrological and ultrastructural study of xerotic
skin. Int J Cosmet Sci 1999; 21:241–249.
71. Rawlings AV, Watkinson A, Rogers J, et al. Abnormalitites in stratum corneum structure lipid
composition and desmosome degradation in soap-induced winter xerosis. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1994;
45:203–220.
72. Warner RR, Boissy YL. Effect of moisturizing products on the structure of lipids in the outer stratum
corneum of humans. In: Loden M, Maibach HI, eds. Dry Skin and Moisturizers. Boca Raton: CRC
Press Inc, 2000:349–372.
73. Forslind B. A domain mosaic model of the skin barrier. Acta Derm Venereol 1999; 79:418–421.
74. White SH, Mirejovsky D, King GI. Structure of lamellar lipid domains and corneocyte envelopes of
murine stratum corneum. An X-ray diffraction study. Biochemistry 1988; 27(10):3725–3732.
75. Bouwstra J, Pilgram G, Gooris G, et al. New aspects of the skin barrier organization. Skin Pharmacol
Appl Skin Physiol 2001; 14(suppl 1):52–62.
76. Norlen L. Skin barrier structure and function: the single gel phase model. J Invest Dermatol 2001;
117(4):830–836.
77. Larsson K. In: Molecular Organization, Physical Functions and Technical Applications. Dundee,
Scotland: The Oily Press, 1994:27.
78. Evans F, Wennerstrom H. In: The Collodial Domain. Where Physics, Chemistry, Biology and
Technology Meet. New York: VCH publishers, 1994:412.
79. Landmann L. Epidermal permeability barrier: transformation of lamellar granule-disks into
intercellular sheets by a membrane-fusion process, a freeze-fracture study. J Invest Dermatol 1986;
87(2):202–209.
80. Norlen L. Nanostructure of the stratum corneum extracellular lipid matrix as observed by cryo-
electron microscopy of vitreous skin sections. Int J Cosmet Sci 2007; 29:335–352.
81. Norlen L. Skin barrier structure, function and formation-learning from cryo-electron microscopy of
vitreous, fully hydrated native human epidermis. Int J Cosmet Sci 2003; 25:209–226.
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
103

=== Page 121 ===
82. Norlen L. Skin barrier formation: the membrane folding model. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 117(4):
823–829.
83. Sparr E, Wennerstrom H. Responding phospholipid membranes—interplay between hydration and
permeability. Biophys J 2001; 81(2):1014–1028.
84. Warner RR, Myers MC, Taylor DA. Electron probe analysis of human skin: determination of the
water concentration profile. J Invest Dermatol 1988; 90(2):218–224.
85. Forslind B, Engstrom S, Engblom J, et al. A novel approach to the understanding of human skin
barrier function. J Dermatol Sci 1997; 14(2):115–125.
86. Ma T, Fukuda N, Song Y, et al. Lung fluid transport in aquaporin-5 knockout mice. J Clin Invest
2000; 105(1):93–100.
87. Ma T, Hara M, Sougrat R, et al. Impaired stratum corneum hydration in mice lacking epidermal
water channel aquaporin-3. J Biol Chem 2002; 277(19):17147–17153.
88. Hara M, Ma T, Verkman AS. Selectively reduced glycerol in skin of aquaporin-3-deficient mice may
account for impaired skin hydration, elasticity, and barrier recovery. J Biol Chem 2002; 277(48):
46616–46621.
89. Hara M, Verkman AS. Glycerol replacement corrects defective skin hydration, elasticity, and barrier
function in aquaporin-3-deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003; 100(12):7360–7365.
90. Boury-Jamot M, Sougrat R, Tailhardat M, et al. Expression and function of aquaporins in human
skin: is aquaporin-3 just a glycerol transporter? Biochim Biophys Acta 2006; 1758(8):1034–1042.
91. Brandner JM, Kief S, Wladykowski E, et al. Tight junction proteins in the skin. Skin Pharmacol
Physiol 2006; 19(2):71–77.
92. Furuse M, Hata M, Furuse K, et al. Claudin-based tight junctions are crucial for the mammalian
epidermal barrier: a lesson from claudin-1-deficient mice. J Cell Biol 2002; 156(6):1099–1111.
93. Egelrud T. Desquamation in the stratum corneum. Acta Derm Venereol (Suppl) (Stockh) 2000;
208:44–45.
94. Lundstrom A, Egelrud T. A chymotrypsin-like proteinase that may be involved in desquamation in
plantar stratum corneum. Arch Dermatol Res 1991; 283:108–112.
95. Caubet C, Jonca N, Brattsand M, et al. Degradation of corneodesmosome proteins by two serine
proteases of the kallikrein family, SCTE/KLK5/hK5 and SCCE/KLK7/hK7. J Invest Dermatol 2004;
122(5):1235–1244.
96. Van Overloop L, Declercq L, Maes D. Visual scaling of human skin correlates to decreased ceramide
levels and decreased stratum corneum protease activity (abstr) J Invest Dermatol 2001; 117:811.
97. Voegeli R, Heiland J, Doppler S, et al. Efficient and simple quantification of stratum corneum
proteins on tape strippings by infrared densitometry. Skin Res Technol 2007; 13(3):242–251.
98. Rogers J, Harding C, Mayo A, et al. Stratum corneum lipids: the effect of ageing and the seasons.
Arch Dermatol Res 1996; 288(12):765–770.
99. Denda M, Sato J, Masuda Y, et al. Exposure to a dry environment enhances epidermal permeability
barrier function. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111(5):858–863.
100. Sato J, Denda M, Nakanishi J, et al. Dry condition affects desquamation of stratum corneum in vivo.
J Dermatol Sci 1998; 18(3):163–169.
101. Katagiri C, Sato J, Nomura J, et al. Changes in environmental humidity affect the water-holding
property of the stratum corneum and its free amino acid content, and the expression of filaggrin in
the epidermis of hairless mice. J Dermatol Sci 2003; 31(1):29–35.
102. Sato J, Denda M, Chang S, et al. Abrupt decreases in environmental humidity induce abnormalities
in permeability barrier homeostasis. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 119(4):900–904.
103. Rawlings A, Harding C, Watkinson A, et al. The effect of glycerol and humidity on desmosome
degradation in stratum corneum. Arch Dermatol Res 1995; 287(5):457–464.
104. Corcuff P, Leveque JL. Corneocyte changes after acute UV irradiation and chronic solar exposure.
Photodermatol 1988; 5(3):110–115.
105. Willis I. The effects of prolonged water exposure on human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1973; 60(3):
166–171.
106. Rissman R, Groenink H, Gooris G, et al. Temperature-induced changes in structural and
physiochemical properties of vernix caseosa. J Invest Dermatol 2007; 128:292–299.
107. Hoath SB, Pickens WL, Visscher MO. The biology of vernix caseosa. Int J Cosmet Sci 2006; 28:
319–333.
108. Haubrich KA. Role of vernix caseosa in the neonate: potential application in the adult population.
AACN Clin Issues 2003; 14(4):457–464.
109. Ertel K. Personal cleansing products: properties and use. In: Draelos ZLT., eds. Cosmetic
Formulation in Skin Care Products. New York: Taylor and Francis, 2006:35–65.
110. Moore PN, Puvvada S, Blankschtein D. Challenging the surfactant monomer skin penetration model:
penetration of sodium dodecyl sulfate micelles into the epidermis. J Cosmet Sci 2003; 54(1):29–46.
111. Rhein LD, Robbins CR, Fernee K, et al. Surfactant structure effects on swelling of isolated human
stratum corneum. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1986; 37:125–139.
104
Kilpatrick-Liverman et al.

=== Page 122 ===
112. Fartasch M. Human barrier formation and reaction to irritation. Curr Probl Dermatol 1995; 23:
95–103.
113. Schepky AG, Holtzmann U, Siegner R, et al. Influence of cleansing on stratum corneum tryptic
enzyme in human skin. Int J Cosmet Sci 2004; 26:245–253.
114. Warner RR, Stone KJ, Boissy YL. Hydration disrupts human stratum corneum ultrastructure. J Invest
Dermatol 2003; 120(2):275–284.
115. Wu J, Polefka T. Confocal Raman microspectroscopy of stratum corneum: a preclinical validation
study. Int J Cosmet Sci 2008; 30:47–56.
116. Ananthapadmanabhan KP, Moore DJ, Subramanyan K, et al. Cleansing without compromise: the
impact of cleansers on the skin barrier and the technology of mild cleansing. Dermatol Ther 2004;
17(suppl 1):16–25.
117. Subramanyan K. Role of mild cleansing in the management of patient skin. Dermatol Ther 2004;
17(suppl 1):26–34.
118. Ananthapadmanabhan KP, Subramanyan K, Bautista B, et al. Advances in skin moisturization from
cleansers. In: 22nd IFSCC Congress, Edinburgh, 2002; 37.
119. Choi EH, Man MQ, Wang F, et al. Is endogenous glycerol a determinant of stratum corneum
hydration in humans? J Invest Dermatol 2005; 125(2):288–293.
120. Black D, Del Pozo A, Lagarde JM, et al. Seasonal variability in the biophysical properties of stratum
corneum from different anatomical sites. Skin Res Technol 2000; 6(2):70–76.
121. Loden M. Skin barrier function: effects of moisturizers. Cosmet Toiletries 2001; 116:31–40.
122. Loden M. In: Fluhr JW, Elsner P, Berardesca E, et al., eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Water and the
Stratum Corneum. New York: CRC Press, LLC, 2005; 295–306.
123. Loden M, Andersson AC, Anderson C, et al. A double-blind study comparing the effect of glycerin
and urea on dry, eczematous skin in atopic patients. Acta Derm Venereol 2002; 82(1):45–47.
124. Loden M. Urea-containing moisturizers influence barrier properties of normal skin. Arch Dermatol
Res 1996; 288(2):103–107.
125. Serup J. A double-blind comparison of two creams containing urea as the active ingredient.
Assessment of efficacy and side-effects by non-invasive techniques and a clinical scoring scheme.
Acta Derm Venereol (suppl) (Stockh) 1992; 177:34–43.
126. Fluhr JW, Gloor M, Lehmann L, et al. Glycerol accelerates recovery of barrier function in vivo. Acta
Derm Venereol 1999; 79(6):418–421.
127. Park B, Kim Y, Lee M, et al. Properties of a pseudoceramide multilabellar emulsion in vitro and
in vivo. Allured’s Cosmet Toiletries 2001; 116:65–76.
128. Aoki Y, Sumida Y. Enhancement of moisturizing abilities of skincare products by a novel water
retaining system, application of lamellar structures composed of polyglycerin fatty acid esters. In:
22nd IFSCC Congress, Edinburgh; 2002; 38.
129. Summers RS, Summers B, Chandar P, et al. The effect of lipids with and without humectant on skin
xerosis. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1996; 47:27–39.
130. Matts PJ, Gray J, Rawlings AV. The “Dryskin Cycle”A new model of dry skin and mechanisms for
intervention. In: The Royal Society of Medicine Press International Congress and Symposium Series,
2005; London: 1–38.
131. Warner RR, Boissy YL, Lilly NA, et al. Water disrupts stratum corneum lipid lamellae: damage is
similar to surfactants. J Invest Dermatol 1999; 113(6):960–966.
132. Fluhr JW, Lazzerini S, Distante F, et al. Effects of prolonged occlusion on stratum corneum barrier
function and water holding capacity. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 1999; 12(4):193–198.
133. Primavera G, Berardesca E. Clinical and instrumental evaluation of a food supplement in improving
skin hydration. Int J Cosmet Sci 2005; 27:199–204.
134. Williams S, Krueger M, Davids M, et al. Effect of fluid intake on skin physiology: distinct difference
between drinking mineral water and tap water. Int J Cosmet Sci 2007; 29:131–138.
135. Mac-Mary S, Creidi P, Marsaut D, et al. Assessment of effects of an additional dietary natural
mineral water uptake on skin hydration in healthy subjects by dynamic barrier function
measurements and clinic scoring. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12(3):199–205.
136. Puch F, Samson-Villeger S, Guyonnet D, et al. Consumption of functional fermented milk containing
borage oil, green tea and vitamin E enhances skin barrier function. Exp Dermatol 2008; 17(8):668–674.
137. Rawlings AV, Canestrari DA, Dobkowski B. Moisturizer technology versus clinical performance.
Dermatol Ther 2004; 17(suppl 1):49–56.
138. Kraft JN, Lynde CW. Moisturizers: what they are and a practical approach to product selection. Skin
Therapy Lett 2005; 10(5):1–8.
139. Fluhr JW, Kao J, Jain M, et al. Generation of free fatty acids from phospholipids regulates stratum
corneum acidification and integrity. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 117(1):44–51.
140. Krien PM, Kermici M. Evidence for the existence of a self-regulated enzymatic process within
the human stratum corneum: an unexpected role for urocanic acid. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 115(3):
414–420.
Mechanisms of Skin Hydration
105

=== Page 123 ===
141. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Bruining H, et al. Automated depth-scanning confocal Raman
microspectrometer for rapid in vivo determination of water concentration profiles in human skin.
J Raman Spec 2000; 31:813–818.
142. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Wolthuis R, et al. In vitro and in vivo Raman spectroscopy of human skin.
Biospectroscopy 1998; 4(5 suppl):S31–S39.
143. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Puppels GJ. Combined in vivo confocal Raman spectroscopy and confocal
microscopy of human skin. Biophys J 2003; 85(1):572–580.
106
Kilpatrick-Liverman et al.

=== Page 124 ===
10
Hydrating Substances
Marie Lode´n
Research & Development, ACO Hud Nordic AB, Upplands Va¨sby, Sweden
INTRODUCTION
Hydrating substances are used in cosmetic products to retard moisture loss from the product
during use and to increase the moisture content in material that is in contact with the product.
This function is generally performed by hygroscopic substances, or humectants, which are able
to absorb water from the surroundings. In the International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary,
approximately 125 substances are listed as humectants and almost 200 hygroscopic materials
are used to increase the water content of the skin (1).
Dry hair and dry skin are the target areas in the body for treatment with humectants.
Sometimes mucous membranes also benefit from application of humectants. Dry hair is brittle and
rough, has a tendency to tangle, and has hardly any luster. Humidity of the atmosphere is the only
source of moisture to hair, except shampooing, and the addition of humectants to the hair will,
therefore, facilitate its retention of water. The same is true for the skin, although it is constantly
supplied with water from inside of the body. The skin forms a critical structural boundary for the
organism and is frequently compromised as a result of under hydration. The water held by the
hygroscopic substances in the stratum corneum (SC) is a controlling factor in maintaining skin
flexibility and desquamation (2,3). Hydration plays an important role in maintaining the metabolism,
enzyme activity, mechanical properties, appearance, and finally, barrier function of the skin.
The special blend of humectants found in the SC is called natural moisturizing factor
(NMF) (4). NMF can make up about 10% of the dry weight of the SC cells (4). Substances
belonging to this group are amino acids, pyrrolidone carboxylic acid (PCA), lactates, urea, and
inorganic ions (Tables 1 and 2) (4). Furthermore, glycerol is found naturally in SC, and the mean
amounts are found to be about 0.7 mg cm2 on the cheek and 0.2 mg cm2 on the forearm and sole
(8). The proportion of the inorganic ions and lactate in the SC differs from that in sweat and also
changes between winter and summer (9). The level of lactate and potassium in the SC appears to
correlate with each other as well as with the physical properties of the SC (9). The levels of lactate
have been found to be approximately 100 times higher than that of glycerol (8,9).
NMF is formed from the protein filaggrin, whose formation is regulated by the moisture
content in the SC (2). In skin diseases such as ichthyosis vulgaris (10,11) and psoriasis (12),
there is a virtual absence of NMF. In ichthyosis vulgaris, the stratum granulosum is thin or
missing because of a defect in the processing of profilaggrin, which is also noticed as tiny and
crumbly keratohyalin granules (13).
Glycerin is another humectant suggested to be important for the SC hydration (Tables 1
and 2). Skin dryness in sebaceous gland–deficient mice has been found to be linked to reduced
levels of glycerin because of absence of triglycerides, which are the primary source for glycerin
(14). This type of dryness may also be applicable to clinical situations where sebaceous glands
are absent or involuted, such as in prepubertal children showing eczematous patches, which
disappear with the onset of sebaceous gland activity. Moreover, xerosis in the distal
extremities of aged skin and in patients receiving systemic isotretinoin for treatment of acne
may be linked to glycerin depletion because of the lower sebaceous gland activity (14).
Physiologically occurring and synthetic substances are used as humectants in cosmetic
products (Tables 1 and 2). The water-binding capacity of the sodium salts of lactic acid and
PCA appears to be higher than that of glycerin and sorbitol (Table 3) (15,16). Treatment of
solvent-damaged guinea pig footpad corneum with humectant solutions shows that the water
held by the corneum decreases in the following order: sodium PCA > sodium lactate >
glycerin > sorbitol (20). Urea also has strong osmotic activity (21,22). However, which of these
substances most efficiently reduces xerosis or other dry skin conditions is not known. Besides
differences in water-binding capacity, their absorption into the skin is important for the effect.

=== Page 125 ===
Table 1
Chemistry of Hygroscopic Substances
Name
CAS-No
Mw
Other names
Natural source
Butylene glycol
107-88-0
90.1
1,3-butanediol, 1,3-butylene
glycol
Glycerin
56-81-5
92.1
Glycerol, 1,2,3-propanetriol
Hydrolysis of oils and fats
Lactic acid
50-21-5
90.1
2-hydroxypropanoic acid
Sour milk and tomato juice
Panthenol
81-13-0
205.3
Dexpanthenol, pantothenol,
provitamin B5
Plants, animals, bacteria
PCA
98-79-3
129.11
L-pyroglutamic acid,
DL-pyrrolidonecarboxylic acid,
2-pyrrolidone-5-carboxylic acid
Vegetables, molasses
Propylene glycol
57-55-6
76.1
1,2-propanediol
Hyaluronic acid
9004-61-9
5  104–8  106 Hyaluronan
Cock’s combs,
biofermentation
Sorbitol
50-70-4
182.17
D-glucitol
Berries, fruits
Urea
57-13-6
60.08
Carbamide, carbonyl diamide
Urine
Abbreviations: MW, molecular weight; PCA, pyrrolidone carboxylic acid.
Source: From Refs. 1, 5–7.
Table 2
Chemical Formulas of Humectants
Humectant
Formula
Butylene glycol
Glycerin
Lactic acid
Panthenol
PCA
Propylene glycol
Sorbitol
Urea

=== Page 126 ===
Hence, the in vitro humectancy should be distinguished from the in vivo moisturizing effect
(23). Some factors to consider during product development are highlighted in Table 4.
This chapter will provide basic information about some commonly used humectants,
which are primarily used for treatment of the skin. Moreover, safety information will also be
provided.
BUTYLENE GLYCOL
Description
Butylene glycol usually means 1,3-butanediol, but the term can also be used for 2,3-butanediol
(Tables 1 and 2). The alcohol is a viscous, colorless liquid with sweet flavor and bitter aftertaste
(5). It is soluble in water, acetone, and castor oil, but practically insoluble in aliphatic
hydrocarbon (5).
General Use
Butylene glycol is used as humectant for cellophane and tobacco (5). It is also used in topical
products and as solvents for injectable products. Butylene glycol is claimed to be most resistant
to high humidity and is often used in hair sprays and setting lotions (24). The alcohol also
retards loss of aromas and preserves cosmetics against spoilage by microorganisms (24).
Safety
Butylene glycol is considered safe by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) Expert Panel
(25). Human skin patch test on undiluted butylene glycol produced a very low order of
primary skin irritation, and a repeated patch test produced no evidence of skin
sensitization (25). The substance is reported to be less irritating than propylene glycol
(26,27). Few reports of contact allergy exist, but the substance does not seem to cross-react
with propylene glycol (26).
Table 3
Moisture-Binding Ability of Humectants at Various Humidities
Humectant
31%
50%
52%
58–60%
76%
81%
Butylene glycol
38e
Glycerin
13c11b
25a
26b
35–38c,f
67b
Na–PCA
20c17b
44a
45b
61–63c,f
210b
Na–lactate
19b
56a
40b
66f
104b
Panthenol
3d
11d
33d
PCA
<1c
<1c
Propylene glycol
32f
Sorbitol
1a
10f
Abbreviation: PCA, pyrrolidone carboxylic acid.
aFrom Ref. 15.
bFrom Ref. 16.
cFrom Ref. 17.
dFrom Ref. 18.
eFrom Ref. 5.
fFrom Ref. 19.
Table 4
Parameters to Consider During Product Development to Obtain the Desired Effect
Formulation related
Effect on the target area
Price and purity?
Product claim?
Chemical stability during production and shelf life?
Substantivity in rinse-off products?
Sensitive to heat? UV-light? pH?
Penetration characteristics?
Incompatibilities with other ingredients?
Hygroscopicity?
Adsorption to the packaging material?
Adverse effects?
Effects on the preservation system?
Hydrating Substances
109

=== Page 127 ===
GLYCERIN
Description
In 1779, the Swedish scientist, C.W. Scheele, discovered that glycerin could be made from a
hydrolyzate of olive oil. The alcohol is a clear, colorless, odorless, syrupy, and hygroscopic
liquid (Tables 1 and 2) (5,12), approximately 0.6 times as sweet as cane sugar (5,12). It is
miscible with water and alcohol, slightly soluble in acetone, and practically insoluble in
chloroform and ether (12,13).
General Use
Glycerin is used as a solvent, plasticizer, sweetener, lubricant, and preservative (5). The
substance has also been given intravenously or by mouth in a variety of clinical conditions in
order to benefit from its osmotic dehydrating properties (6). This effect can also be used
topically for the short-term reduction of vitreous volume and intraocular pressure of the eye
(6). Moreover, concentrated solutions of glycerin are used to soften earwax (6) and
suppositories with glycerin (dose 1–3 g) promote fecal evacuation (6).
Effects on Skin
The importance of glycerin in skin care products is well established. To explain its benefits,
studies have focused on its humectant and protecting properties. Levels ranging between a few
percent and 20% to 25% are used in moisturizers for treatment of dry skin conditions (28).
Glycerin not only attracts water but has also been suggested to modulate the phase behavior of
SC lipids and to prevent crystallization of their lamellar structures in vitro at low relative
humidity (29). Incorporation of glycerin into an SC model lipid mixture enables the lipids to
maintain the liquid crystal state at low humidity (29). The biochemical consequences of these
properties may be due to the influence of the activity of hydrolytic enzymes crucial to the
desquamatory process in vivo (30). Thereby, the rate of corneocyte loss from the superficial
surface of human skin increases, probably because of an enhanced desmosome degradation
(2,30).
The mode of action of glycerol both on SC hydration and epidermal barrier function
seems to be related to the aquaporin 3 channel. The aquaporins are a family of small, integral
membrane proteins that function as plasma membrane transporters of water and in some
cases small polar solutes [reviewed in (31)]. Glycerol is transported very slowly into the
epidermis, and thus, its transport rate is sensitive to the intrinsic glycerol permeability of the
basal keratinocyte layer. Repeated tape stripping taken from skin treated with 15% glycerin
cream indicates that glycerin diffuses into the SC to form a reservoir (32). During some hours
after application, a decrease in transepidermal water loss (TEWL) has been noted (32–35)
followed by increased values after some hours in animal skin (35). No evidence of
deterioration of the skin barrier function has been noted after long-term treatment of normal
and atopic skin with 20% glycerin (36,37). Instead, glycerin has been found to accelerate
barrier recovery after acute external perturbations (38). Moreover, in human skin, its surface
profile, electrical impedance, and increase in the coefficient of friction were found to
accompany an improvement in the skin condition, as assessed by an expert (33). Glycerin is
also suggested to induce a shrinking of superficial corneocytes, which was independent from
osmotic effects (39). This contraction might give a more compact SC and reduce the risk for
irritant contact dermatitis (39).
Safety
Very large oral or parenteral doses can exert systemic effects because of the increase in
the plasma osmolality, resulting in the movement of water by osmosis from the
extravascular spaces into the plasma (6). Glycerin dropped on the human eye causes a
strong stinging and burning sensation, with tearing and dilatation of the conjunctival
vessels (40). There is no obvious injury, but studies have indicated that glycerin can
damage the endothelial cells of the cornea (6,40). Glycerin has been shown to have
excellent skin tolerability, and treatment with 20% glycerin did not show any signs of
adverse effects on atopic dry skin (28).
110
Lode´n

=== Page 128 ===
HYALURONAN (HYALURONIC ACID)
Description
The earliest work on skin was devoted predominantly to the cells that make up the layers of
skin: epidermis, dermis, and underlying subcutis. Now it is beginning to be appreciated that
the materials that lie between cells, the matrix components, have major instructive roles for
cellular activities. This extracellular matrix endows skin with its hydration properties. The
components of the extracellular matrix appear amorphous by light microscopy, but form a
highly organized structure of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), proteoglycans, glycoproteins,
peptide growth factors, and structural proteins such as collagen and, to a lesser extent, elastin.
The predominant component of the extracellular matrix, however, is hyaluronan; one of the
first extracellular matrix component to be elaborated in the developing embryo [reviewed in
(41)]. The term “hyaluronan” is used to cover both hyaluronic acid and sodium hyaluronate.
Hyaluronan is a member of the class of amino sugars containing polysaccharides known as the
GAGs widely distributed in body tissues. The polymer provides the turgor for the vitreous
humor of the eye and the name “hyaluronic acid” derives from the Greek hyalos (glossy,
vitreous) and uronic acid. Molecular weight is within the range of 50,000 to 8  106, depending
on source, methods of preparation, and determination (5). Hyaluronic acid is a regulator of cell
behavior and influences cellular metabolism. Moreover, the molecule binds water and
functions as a lubricant between the collagen and the elastic fiber networks in dermis during
skin movement. A 2% aqueous solution of pure hyaluronic acid holds the remaining 98%
water so tightly that it can be picked up as though it was a gel (42).
The skin is the largest reservoir of hyaluronic acid, containing more than 50% of the total
body. The papillary dermis has the most prominent levels of hyaluronic acid than the reticular
dermis. Hyaluronic acid is extracted from cock’s comb or obtained from streptococci
(Lancefield Groups A and C) (6). During manufacturing, the large, unbranched, noncross-
linked, water-containing molecule is easily broken by shear forces (42). The carbohydrate chain
is also very sensitive to breakdown by free radicals, UV radiation, and oxidative agents (42).
General Use
A viscous solution of sodium hyaluronate is used during surgical procedures on the eye and is
also given by intra-articular injection in the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee (6).
Hyaluronic acid is also applied topically to promote wound healing. Topical application of
0.1% solution in patients with dry eye has been suggested to alleviate symptoms of irritation
and grittiness (6).
Effects on Skin
High molecular weight hyaluronic acid solutions form hydrated viscoelastic films on the skin
(42). The larger the molecular size, the greater the aggregation and entanglement of the
molecules, and hence, the more substantial and functional the viscoelastic film associated with
the skin surface (42). Owing to the high molecular weight, hyaluronic acid will not penetrate
deeper than the crevices between the desquamating cells. The polymer may also be injected to
obtain a smoother surface and reduce the depth of wrinkles.
Safety
Sodium hyaluronate is essentially nontoxic. When the substance is used as an ophthalmic
surgical aid, transient inflammatory ocular response has been described (6).
LACTIC ACID
Description
Lactic acid is colorless to yellowish crystal or syrupy liquid, miscible with water, alcohol, and
glycerol, but insoluble in chloroform (6). Lactic acid is an a-hydroxy acid (AHA), i.e., an
organic carboxylic acid in which there is a hydroxy group at the two, or a, position of the
carbon chain (Table 2). Lactic acid can exist in a DL, D, or L form. The L and the D forms are
enantiomorphic isomers (mirror images). Lactate is also a component of the natural
hygroscopic material of the SC and constitutes about 12% of this material (Table 1) (4).
Hydrating Substances
111

=== Page 129 ===
Formulations containing lactic acid have an acidic pH in the absence of any inorganic
alkali or organic base. The pH is increased in several formulations by partial neutralization.
General Use
Lactic acid has been used in topical preparations for several decades because of its buffering
properties and water-binding capacity (6,20). Lactic acid and its salts have been used for
douching and to help maintain the normal, acidic atmosphere of the vagina. Lactic acid has
also been used for correction of disorders associated with hyperplasia and/or retention of the
SC, such as dandruff, callus, keratosis, and verrucae (viral warts) (6). Moreover, lactic acid has
been suggested to be effective for adjuvant therapy of mild acne (43). Also, ethyl lactate has
been proposed to be effective in the treatment of acne, due to its penetration into the sebaceous
follicle ducts with subsequent lowering of pH and decrease in the formation of fatty acids (44).
Investigators have also reported increases in the thickness of viable epidermis (45,46) as
well as improvement in photoaging changes (45,47). Lactic acid in combination with other
peeling agents is used to produce a controlled partial-thickness injury to the skin, which is
believed to improve the clinical appearance of the skin (48).
Effects on Skin
In guinea pig footpad corneum, it has been shown that both lactic acid and sodium lactate
increase the water-holding capacity and skin extensibility (20). Potassium lactate has been
suggested to restore SC hydration more effectively than sodium lactate, suggesting that
potassium ion itself may play certain roles in maintaining the physical properties of the SC (9).
With increasing pH, the adsorption of lactic acid decreases, because of the ionization of the
acid (20). In another study on strips of SC from human abdominal skin, the uptake of water by
sodium lactate was greater than that by lactic acid, but the SC was plasticized by lactic acid and
not by sodium lactate (15). Lactic acid also reduces the cohesion between the corneocytes and
interferes with the bonding between the cells, which causes an increased cell turnover,
especially at pH around 3 (49–51).
The concentrations used for treatment of ichthyosis and dry skin have ranged up to
12% (52). After treatment with 5% lactic acid combined with 20% propylene glycol,
increased TEWL has been noted in patients with lamellar ichthyosis (53). However, lactic
acid has been suggested to stimulate the ceramide synthesis and improve skin barrier
function (54,55).
Safety
Lactic acid is caustic to the skin, eyes, and mucous membranes in a concentrated form (40).
Compared to other acids, lactic acid has no unusual capacity to penetrate the cornea, so its
injurious effect is presumably attributable to its acidity (40).
Immediately after the application of an AHA, stinging and smarting may be noticed; this
is closely related to the pH of the preparations and the substances themselves (50,51,56). The
emulsion type has been reported to influence the degree of stinging, where water-in-oil
emulsions induced less stinging than ordinary oil-in-water ones (57). In normal skin, irritation
and scaling may be induced when the acids are applied in high concentrations and at low pH
(58). At a fixed lactic acid concentration, the desquamative effect is highly pH dependent,
while at fixed pH, the turnover rate of skin is concentration dependent (51). Increased
sensitivity to UV-light has also been detected, which raises concerns over long-term use (59).
Due to insufficient safety data, the FDA recommends that lactic acid should be used up to a
maximum level of 2.5% and a pH  5 (59).
PANTHENOL
Description
D-Panthenol is a clear, almost colorless, odorless, and viscous hygroscopic liquid, which may
crystallize on prolonged storage (Tables 1 and 2) (6). Panthenol is an alcohol, which is
converted in tissues to D-pantothenic acid (vitamin B5), a component of coenzyme A in the
body. The substance can be isolated from various living creatures, which gave the reason for its
112
Lode´n

=== Page 130 ===
name (Table 1) (Panthoten is Greek for everywhere) (60). Panthenol is very soluble in water,
freely soluble in alcohol and glycerol, but insoluble in fats and oils (18). The substance is fairly
stable to air and light if protected from humidity, but it is sensitive to acids and bases and also
to heat (18). The rate of hydrolysis is lowest at pH 4 to 6 (18).
General Use
Panthenol is widely used in the pharmaceutical and cosmetic industry for its moisturizing,
soothing, and sedative properties (60,61). It is also found in topical treatments for rhinitis,
conjunctivitis, sunburn, and wound healing (ulcers, burns, bed sores, and excoriations);
usually 2% is used (6,60). The mechanisms of action are only partly known. The
hygroscopic alcohol can further be used to prevent crystallization at the spray nozzles of
aerosols (18).
Effects on Skin and Hair
Topically applied panthenol is reported to penetrate the skin and hairs and to be transformed
into pantothenic acid (60,62). Treatment of sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS)-induced irritated skin
with panthenol accelerates skin barrier repair and SC hydration (61). Moreover, skin redness
decreased more rapidly by panthenol treatment (61). Pantothenic acid can be found in normal
hair (18). Soaking of hair in 2% aqueous solution of panthenol has been reported to increase the
hair diameter up to 10% (63).
Safety
Panthenol has very low toxicity and is considered safe to be used in cosmetics (62). Panthenol
and products containing panthenol (0.5–2%) administered to rabbits caused reactions ranging
from no skin irritation to moderate-to-severe erythema and well-defined edema (62). Low
concentrations have also been tested on humans, and those formulations did not induce
sensitization or significant skin irritation (62). Contact sensitization to panthenol present in
cosmetics, sunscreens, and hair lotion has been reported, although allergy to panthenol among
patients attending for patch testing is uncommon (60,64).
PCA AND SALTS OF PCA
Description
“PCA” is the cosmetic ingredient term used for the cyclic organic compound known as
2-pyrrolidone-5-carboxylic acid (Tables 1 and 2). The “L” form of the sodium salt is a naturally
occurring humectant in the SC at levels about 12% of the NMF (4) corresponding to about 2%
by weight in the SC (17). The sodium salts of PCA are among the most powerful humectants
(Table 3). PCA is also combined with a variety of other substances, such as, arginine, lysine,
chitosan, and triethanolamine (1).
Effects on Skin
A significant relationship has been found between the moisture-binding ability and the PCA
content of samples of SC (17). Treatment with a cream containing 5% sodium-PCA also
increased the water-holding capacity of isolated corneum compared with the cream base (65).
The same cream was also more effective than a control product containing no humectant, and
equally effective as a similar established product with urea as humectant, in reducing the skin
dryness and flakiness (65).
Safety
In animal studies, no irritation in the eye and the skin was noted at concentrations up to 50%,
and no evidence of phototoxicity, sensitization, or comedogenicity was found (66). Minimal,
transient ocular irritation has been produced by 50% PCA (66). Immediate visible contact
reactions in back skin have also been noted after application of 6.25% to 50% aqueous solutions
of sodium PCA (67). The response appeared within five minutes and disappeared 30 minutes
after application. PCA should not be used in cosmetic products in which N-nitroso compounds
could be formed (66).
Hydrating Substances
113

=== Page 131 ===
PROPYLENE GLYCOL
Description
Propylene glycol is a clear, colorless, viscous, and practically odorless liquid having a sweet,
slightly acrid taste resembling glycerol (Tables 1 and 2) (7). Under ordinary conditions it is
stable in well-closed containers, and it is also chemically stable when mixed with glycerin,
water, or alcohol (7).
General Use
Propylene glycol is widely used in cosmetic and pharmaceutical manufacturing as a solvent
and vehicle, especially, for substances unstable or insoluble in water (7) (5,60). It is also often
used in foods as antifreeze and emulsifier (5,7). Propylene glycol is also used as an inhibitor of
fermentation and mold growth (5).
Effects on Skin
Propylene glycol has been tried in the treatment of a number of skin disorders, including
ichthyosis (53,68,69), tinea versicolor (70), and seborrheic dermatitis (71), because of its
humectant, keratolytic, antibacterial, and antifungal properties (7,72).
Safety
Propylene glycol has been given an acceptable daily intake (ADI) value of 25 mg/kg by the
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee of Food (7,73). Poisoning has been found after oral doses
of around 100 to 200 mg/kg to children (74–76) and after topical treatment with high
concentrations in burn patients (77), but the alcohol is considered safe for use in cosmetic
products (78).
Clinical data have shown skin irritation and sensitization reactions to propylene glycol in
normal subjects at concentrations as low as 10% under occlusive conditions and in dermatitis
patients as low as 2% (27,78). The nature of the cutaneous response remains obscure and,
therefore, the skin reactions have been classified into four mechanisms: (i) irritant contact
dermatitis, (ii) allergic contact dermatitis, (iii) nonimmunologic contact urticaria, and
(iv) subjective or sensory irritation (79). This concept allows a partial explanation of effects
observed by different authors (79).
PROTEINS
Description
Proteins and amino acids for cosmetics are based on a variety of natural sources. Collagen is
the traditional protein used in cosmetics. Collagen has a complex triple helical structure, which
is responsible for its high moisture retention properties. Vegetable-based proteins have grown
in importance during recent years as an alternative to using animal by-products. Suitable
sources include wheat, rice, soybean, and oat.
In cosmetics, native proteins can be used, but perhaps the most widely used protein
types are hydrolyzed proteins of intermediate molecular weight with higher solubility. An
increased substantivity is obtained by binding fatty alkyl quaternary groups to the protein.
Improved film-forming properties can be obtained by combining the protein and
polyvinylpyrrolidone into a copolymer. Such modifications may increase the moisture
absorption compared with the parent compound. Potential problems with proteins are their
odor and change in color with time. Furthermore, as they are nutrients, their inclusion in
cosmetics may require stronger preservatives.
Efficacy and Safety
Amino acids belong to the NMF and account for 40% of its dry weight (4). Because of their
relatively low molecular weight, they are capable of penetrating the skin and cuticle of the hair
more effectively than the higher molecular weight protein hydrolyzates.
Salts of the condensation product of coconut acid and hydrolyzed animal protein (80)
and wheat flour and wheat starch (81) are considered safe as cosmetic ingredients by CIR. The
most frequent clinical presentation of protein contact dermatitis is a chronic or recurrent
dermatitis (82). Sometimes an urticarial or vesicular exacerbation has been noted a few minutes
114
Lode´n

=== Page 132 ===
after contact with the causative substance (82,83). Hair conditioners containing quaternary
hydrolyzed protein or hydrolyzed bovine collagen have induced contact urticaria and
respiratory symptoms (83). Atopic constitution seems to be a predisposing factor in the
development of protein contact dermatitis (83).
SORBITOL
Description
Sorbitol is a hexahydric alcohol appearing as a white crystalline powder, odorless, and having
a fresh and sweet taste (Tables 1 and 2) (6). It occurs naturally in fruit and vegetables and is
prepared commercially by the reduction of glucose. Sorbitol is most commonly available as
70% aqueous solution, which is clear, colorless, and viscous. It is easily dissolved in water, but
not so well in alcohol. It is practically insoluble in organic solvents.
Sorbitol is relatively chemically inert and compatible with most excipients, but it may
react with iron oxide and become discolored (7).
General Use
Sorbitol is used in pharmaceutical tablets and in candies when noncariogenic properties are
desired. It is also used as sweetener in diabetic foods and in toothpastes. Sorbitol is also used
as laxative intrarectally and believed to produce less troublesome side effects than glycerin (6).
Its hygroscopic properties are reported to be inferior to that of glycerin (Table 3) (15,84).
Safety
When ingested in large amounts (>20 g/day), it often produces a laxative effect (6,7).
UREA
Description
Urea is another physiological substance occurring in human tissues, blood, and urine (Tables 1
and 2). The amount is of the order of 2% in urine. The extraction of pure urea from urine was
first accomplished by Proust in 1821, and pure urea was first synthesized by Wo¨hler in 1828
(85).
Urea is a colorless, transparent, slightly hygroscopic, odorless or almost odorless,
prismatic crystal, or white crystalline powder or pellet. Urea is freely soluble in water, slightly
soluble in alcohol, and practically insoluble in ether (6). Urea in solution hydrolyzes slowly to
ammonia and carbon dioxide, which may cause swelling of the packaging (6).
General Use
Urea is used as a 10% cream for the treatment of ichthyosis and hyperkeratotic skin disorders
(85,86) and in lower concentrations for the treatment of dry skin. In the treatment of
onychomycosis, urea is added to a medicinal formulation at 40% as a keratoplastic agent to
increase the bioavailability of the drug (87).
Effects on Skin
An increased water-holding capacity of scales from psoriatic and ichthyotic patients has been
observed after treatment with urea-containing creams (86,88).
Concern has been expressed about the use of urea in moisturizers, with reference to the
risk of reducing the chemical barrier function of the skin to toxic substances (21). The increase
in skin permeability by urea has been shown in several studies, where it has been found to be
an efficient accelerant for the penetration of different substances (89–91). Not all studies,
however, support the belief that urea is an effective penetration promoter (92,93), and
treatment of normal skin with moisturizers containing 5% to 10% urea has been found to
reduce TEWL and also to diminish the irritative response to the surfactant SLS (94,95). One
moisturizer with urea also reduced TEWL in atopic patients (36,96) and made skin less
susceptible against irritation to SLS (97). Improvement in skin barrier function has also been
shown in dry skin (98) and in ichthyotic patients (86).
Hydrating Substances
115

=== Page 133 ===
Safety
Urea is a naturally occurring substance in the body, as the main nitrogen containing
degradation product of protein metabolism. Urea is an osmotic diuretic and has been used in
the past for treatment of acute increase in intracranial pressure due to cerebral edema (6). No
evidence of acute or cumulative irritation has been noted in previous studies on urea-
containing moisturizers, but skin stinging and burning are reported after treatment with 4% to
10% urea creams in dry and lesioned skin (98–100).
CONCLUSIONS
A number of interesting humectants are available as cosmetic ingredients. Most of them have a
long and safe history of use, and several are also naturally occurring in the body or accepted as
food additives. The low–molecular weight substances are easily absorbed into the skin,
providing a potential drawback of stinging sensations from some of them. The high–molecular
weight substances usually do not penetrate the skin, but instead, they are suggested to reduce
the irritation potential of surfactants. However, case reports of urticarial reactions have been
reported after exposure to modified proteins (83).
The advantage with the larger and chemically modified materials are that they have an
increased substantivity to target areas, whereas it is apparent that small amounts of several
low–molecular weight hygroscopic substances have a questionable contribution to the water
content of hair and SC in rinse-off products (Table 4).
Another issue worth considering is whether the obtained humectancy is the only mode
of action. Some humectants may modify the surface properties and increase the extensibility of
SC without influencing the water content. Furthermore, humectants may also modify skin
barrier function and influence specific metabolic processes in the skin. One should also keep in
mind that humectants can improve the cosmetic properties of the formulation, and some of
them also facilitate marketing of the product just because of their names.
REFERENCES
1. Pepe RC, Wenninger JA. International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook. Washington:
The Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association, 2002.
2. Rawlings AV, Matts PJ. Stratum corneum moisturization at the molecular level: an update in relation
to the dry skin cycle. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 124:1099–1110.
3. Blank IH. Factors which influence the water content of the stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1952;
18:433–440.
4. Jacobi OK. Moisture regulation in the skin. Drug Cosmet Ind 1959; 84:732–812.
5. Budavari S. The Merck Index. Rahway, NJ: Merck & Co., 1989.
6. Sweetman S, ed. Martindale: The Complete Drug Reference. London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2005.
7. Rowe RC, Sheskey PJ, Weller PJ. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients. 4th ed. London:
Pharmaceutical Press, 2003.
8. Yoneya T, Nishijima Y. Determination of free glycerol on human skin surface: biomedical mass
spectrometry 1979; 6:191–193.
9. Nakagawa N, Sakai S, Matsumoto M, et al. Relationship between NMF (lactate and potassium)
content and the physical properties of the stratum corneum in healthy subjects. J Invest Dermatol
2004; 122:755–763.
10. Horii I, Nakayama Y, Obata M, et al. Stratum corneum hydration and amino acid content in xerotic
skin. Br J Dermatol 1989; 121:587–592.
11. Sybert VP, Dale BA, Holbrook KA. Ichthyosis vulgaris: identification of a defect in filaggrin
synthesis correlated with an absence of keratohyaline granules. J Invest Dermatol 1985; 84:191–194.
12. Marstein S, Jellum E, Eldjarn L. The concentration of pyroglutamic acid (2-pyrrolidone-5-carboxylic
acid) in normal and psoriatic epidermis, determined on a microgram scale by gas chromatography.
Clinica Chimica Acta 1973; 43:389–395.
13. Vahlquist A. Ichthyosis: an inborn dryness and scaliness of the skin. In: Lode´n M, Maibach, HI, eds.
Dry Skin and Moisturizers Chemistry and Function. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis
Group, 2006:83–94.
116
Lode´n

=== Page 134 ===
14. Fluhr JW, Mao-Qiang M, Brown BE, et al. Glycerol regulates stratum corneum hydration in
sebaceous gland deficient (asebia) mice. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120:728–737.
15. Takahashi M, Yamada M, Machida Y. A new method to evaluate the softening effect of cosmetic
ingredients on the skin. J Soc Cosm Chem 1984; 35:171–181.
16. Rieger MM, Deem DE. Skin moisturizers: II the effects of cosmetic ingredients on human stratum
corneum. J Soc Cosm Chem 1974; 25:253–262.
17. Laden K, Spitzer R. Identification of a natural moisturizing agent in skin. J Soc Cosm Chem 1967;
18:351–360.
18. Huni JES. Panthenol. Basel Roche. 1981.
19. Huttinger R. Restoring hydrophilic properties to the stratum corneum: a new humectant. Cosmet
Toilet 1978; 93:61–62.
20. Middleton J. Development of a skin cream designed to reduce dry and flaky skin. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1974; 25:519–534.
21. Hellgren L, Larsson K. On the effect of urea on human epidermis. Dermatologica 1974; 149:89–93.
22. Miettinen H, Johansson G, Gobom S, et al. Studies on constituents of moisturizers: water-
binding properties of urea and NaCl in aqueous solutions. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol
1999; 12:344–351.
23. Sagiv AE, Marcus Y. The connection between in vitro water uptake and in vivo skin moisturization.
Skin Res Technol 2003; 9:306–311.
24. Rietschel RL, Fowler JF. Fisher’s contact dermatitis. 4th ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1995.
25. Final report of the safety assessment of butylene glycol, hexylene glycol, ethoxydiglycol, and
dipropylene glycol. J Am Coll Toxicol 1985; 2:223–248.
26. Sugiura M, Hayakawa R. Contact dermatitis due to 1,3-butylene glycol. Contact Dermatitis 1997;
37:90.
27. Fan W, Kinnunen T, Niinima¨ke A, et al. Skin reactions to glycols used in dermatological and
cosmetic vehicles. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1991; 2:181–183.
28. Lode´n M, Andersson AC, Anderson C, et al. A double-blind study comparing the effect of glycerin
and urea on dry, eczematous skin in atopic patients. Acta Derm Venereol 2002; 82:45–47.
29. Froebe CL, Simion FA, Ohlmeyer H, et al. Prevention of stratum corneum lipid phase transitions
in vitro by glycerol: an alternative mechanism for skin moisturization. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1990;
41:51–65.
30. Rawlings AV, Harding C, Watkinson A, et al. The effect of glycerol and humidity on desmosome
degradation in stratum corneum. Arch Dermatol Res 1995; 287:457–464.
31. Brandner JM. Pores in the epidermis: aquaporins and tight junctions. Int J Cosm Sci 2007; 29:413–422.
32. Batt MD, Fairhurst E. Hydration of the stratum corneum. Int J Cosm Sci 1986; 8:253–264.
33. Batt MD, Davis WB, Fairhurst E, et al. Changes in the physical properties of the stratum corneum
following treatment with glycerol. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1988; 39:367–381.
34. Wilson DR, Berardesca E, Maibach H. In vivo transepidermal water loss and skin surface hydration
in assessment of moisturization and soap effects. Int J Cosmet Sci 1988; 10:201–211.
35. Lieb LM, Nash RA, Matias JR, et al. A new in vitro method for transepidermal water loss: a possible
method for moisturizer evaluation. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1988; 39:107–119.
36. Lode´n M, Andersson AC, Andersson C, et al. Instrumental and dermatologist evaluation of the
effect of glycerin and urea on dry skin in atopic dermatitis. Skin Res Technol 2001; 7:209–213.
37. Lode´n M, Wessman C. The influence of a cream containing 20% glycerin and its vehicle on skin
barrier properties. Int J Cosm Sci 2001; 23:115–120.
38. Fluhr JW, Gloor M, Lehmann L, et al. Glycerol accelerates recovery of barrier function in vivo. Acta
Derm Venereol 1999; 79:418–421.
39. Fluhr J, Bornkessel A, Berardesca E. Glycerol: just a moisturizer? Biological and biophysical effects.
In: Lode´n M, Maibach HI, eds. Dry Skin and Moisturizers Chemistry and Function. 2nd ed. Boca
Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis Group, 2005:227–243.
40. Grant WM. Toxicology of the eye. 3rd ed. Springfield: Charles C Thomas, 1986.
41. Stern R. Hyaluronan: Key to skin moisture. In: Lode´n M, Maibach, HI, eds. Dry Skin and
Moisturizers Chemistry and Function. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis Group, 2005:246–278.
42. Balazs EA, Band P. Hyaluronic acid: its structure and use. Cosmet Toilet 1984; 99:65–72.
43. Berson DS, Shalita AR. The treatment of acne: the role of combination therapies. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1995; 32:S31–S41.
44. Prottey C, George D, Leech RW, et al. The mode of action of ethyl lactate as a treatment for acne. Br J
Dermatol 1984; 110:475–485.
45. Ditre CM, Griffin TD, Murphy GF, et al. Effects of alpha-hydroxy acids on photoaged skin: a pilot
clinical, histologic, and ultrastructural study. J Am Acad Dermatol 1996; 34:187–195.
46. Lavker RM, Kaidbey K, Leyden JJ. Effects of topical ammonium lactate on cutaneous atrophy from a
potent topical corticosteroid. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992; 26:535–544.
Hydrating Substances
117

=== Page 135 ===
47. Stiller MJ, Bartolone J, Stern R, et al. Topical 8% glycolic acid and 8% L-lactic acid creams for the
treatment of photodamaged skin: a double-blind vehicle-controlled clinical trial. Arch Dermatol
1996; 132:631–636.
48. Glogau RG, Matarasso SL. Chemical face peeling: patient and peeling agent selection. Facial Plast
Surg 1995; 11:1–8.
49. Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. Hyperkeratinization, corneocyte cohesion, and alpha-hydroxy acids. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1984; 11:867–879.
50. Smith WP. Comparative effectiveness of alfa-hydroxy acids on skin properties. Int J Cosm Sci 1996;
18:75–83.
51. Thueson DO, Chan EK, Oechsli LM, Hahn GS. The roles of pH and concentration in lactic acid-
induced stimulation of epidermal turnover. Dermatol Surg 1998; 24:641–645.
52. Wehr R, Krochmal L, Bagatell F. W. R. A controlled two-center study of lactate 12% lotion and a
petrolatum-based creme in patients with xerosis. Cutis 1986; 37:205–209.
53. Ga˚nemo A, Virtanen M, Vahlquist A. Improved topical treatment of lamellar ichthyosis: a double-
blind study of four different cream formulations. Br J Dermatol 1999; 141:1027–1032.
54. Rawlings AV, Davies A, Carlomusto M, et al. Effect of lactic acid isomers on keratinocyte ceramide
synthesis, stratum corneum lipid levels and stratum corneum barrier function. Arch Dermatol Res
1996; 288:383–390.
55. Berardesca E, Distante F, Vignoli GP, et al. Alpha-hydroxyacids modulate stratum corneum barrier
function. Br J Dermatol 1997; 137:934–938.
56. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. A method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied
substances. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:197–209.
57. Sahlin A, Edlund F, Lode´n M.. A double-blind and controlled study on the influence of the vehicle
on the skin susceptibility to stinging from lactic acid. Int J Cosm Sci 2007; 29:385–390.
58. Effendy I, Kwangsukstith C, Lee JY, et al. Functional changes in human stratum corneum
induced by topical glycolic acid: comparison with all-trans retinoic acid. Acta Derm Venereol
1995; 75:455–458.
59. The Scientific Committee on Cosmetic Products and Non-Food Products intended for consumers.
The safety of alpha-hydroxy acids. Adopted by the SCCNFP during the 13th plenary meeting of
28 June 2000. p. 2–10. Available at: http://www.ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/sccp/
documents/out 121_en.pdf.
60. Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Wyss M, Elsner P. Contact allergy to dexpanthenol. A report of seven cases
and review of the literature. Dermatosen 1995; 43:175–178.
61. Proksch E, Nissen HP. Dexpanthenol enhances skin barrier repair and reduces inflammation after
sodium lauryl sulfate-induced irritation. J Dermatol Treatm 2002; 13:173–178.
62. Final Report on the safety assessment of panthenol and pantothenic acid. J Am Coll Toxicol 1987;
6:139–163.
63. Driscoll WR. Panthenol in hair products.. D&CI 1975; 45–149.
64. Stables GI, Wilkinson SM. Allergic contact dermatitis due to panthenol. Contact Dermatitis 1998;
38:236–237.
65. Middleton JD, Roberts ME. Effect of a skin cream containing the sodium salt of pyrrolidone
carboxylic acid on dry and flaky skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1978; 29:201–205.
66. PCA and sodium PCA. Cosmetic Ingredient Review, Washington. 1997 CIR Compendium. 1997;
106–107.
67. Larmi E, Lahti A, Hannuksela M. Immediate contact reactions to benzoic acid and the sodium salt of
pyrrolidone carboxylic acid: comparison of various skin sites. Contact Dermatitis 1989; 20:38–40.
68. Ga˚nemo A, Vahlquist A. Lamellar ichthyosis is markedly improved by a novel combination of
emollients. Br J Dermatol 1997; 137:1011–1031.
69. Goldsmith LA, Baden HP. Propylene glycol with occlusion for treatment of ichthyosis. JAMA 1972;
220:579–580.
70. Faergemann J, Fredriksson T. Propylene glycol in the treatment of tinea versicolor. Acta Derm
Venereol 1980; 60:92–93.
71. Faergemann J. Propylene glycol in the treatment of seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp: a double-blind
study. Cutis 1988; 42:69–71.
72. Catanzaro JM, Smith JG Jr. Propylene glycol dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991; 24:90–95.
73. TNO. Toxicity Profile – Propylene Glycol. Surrey, U.K.: BIBRA International Ltd, 1996.
74. Glover ML, Reed MD. Propylene glycol: The safe diluent that continues to cause harm.
Pharmacotherapy 1996; 16:690–693.
75. LaKind JS, McKenna EA, Hubner RP, et al. A review of the comparative mammalian toxicity of
ethylene glycol and propylene glycol. Crit Rev Toxicol 1999; 29:331–365.
76. Mortensen B. Propylene glycol. Nord 1993; 29:181–208.
77. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Drugs. “Inactive” ingredients in pharmaceutical
products: Update (Subject review). Pediatrics 1997; 99:268–278.
118
Lode´n

=== Page 136 ===
78. Final report of the safety assessment of propylene glycol and polypropylene glycols (PPG-9,-12,-15,-
17,-20,-26,-30, and 34). J Am Coll Toxicol 1994; 13:437–491.
79. Funk JO, Maibach HI. Propylene glycol dermatitis: reevaluation of an old problem. Contact
Dermatitis 1994; 31:236–241.
80. Final report on the safety assessment of potassium-coco-hydrolyzed animal protein and triethanolamine-
coco-hydrolyzed animal protein. J Am Coll Toxicol 1983; 2:75–86.
81. Final report on the safety assessment of wheat flour and wheat starch. J Environ Pathol Toxicol 1980;
4:19–32.
82. Janssens V, Morren M, Dooms-Goossens A, et al. Protein contact dermatitis: myth or reality? Br J
Dermatol 1995; 132:1–6.
83. Freeman S, Lee MS. Contact urticaria to hair conditioner. Contact Dermatitis 1996; 35:195–196.
84. Rovesti P, Ricciardi DP. New experiments on the use of sorbitol in the field of cosmetics. P&EOR.
1959.
85. Rosten M. The treatment of ichthyosis and hyperkeratotic conditions with urea. Aust J Derm 1970;
11:142–144.
86. Grice K, Sattar H, Baker H. Urea and retinoic acid in ichthyosis and their effect on transepidermal
water loss and water-holding capacity of stratum corneum. Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 1973;
54:114–118.
87. Fritsch H, Stettendorf S, Hegemann L. Ultrastructural changes in onychomycosis during the
treatment with bifonazole/urea ointment. Dermatology 1992; 185:32–36.
88. Swanbeck G. A new treatment of ichthyosis and other hyperkeratotic conditions. Acta Derm
Venereol (Stockh) 1968; 48:123–127.
89. Wohlrab W. The influence of urea on the penetration kinetics of vitamin-A-acid into human skin.
Z Hautkr 1990; 65:803–805.
90. Beastall J, Guy RH, Hadgraft J, et al. The influence of urea on percutaneous absorption. Pharm Res
1986; 3:294–297.
91. Kim CK, Kim JJ, Chi SC, et al. Effect of fatty acids and urea on the penetration of ketoprofen through
rat skin. Int J Pharm 1993; 99:109–118.
92. Lippold BC, Hackemuller D. The influence of skin moisturizers on drug penetration in vivo. Int J
Pharm 1990; 61:205–211.
93. Wahlberg JE, Swanbeck G. The effect of urea and lactic acid on the percutaneous absorption of
hydrocortisone. Acta Derm Venereol 1973; 53:207–210.
94. Lode´n M. Urea-containing moisturizers influence barrier properties of normal skin. Arch Dermatol
Res 1996; 288:103–107.
95. Lode´n M. Barrier recovery and influence of irritant stimuli in skin treated with a moisturizing cream.
Contact Dermatitis 1997; 36:256–260.
96. Andersson A-C, Lindberg, M, Lode´n, M. The effect of two urea-containing creams on dry,
eczematous skin in atopic patients. I. Expert, patient and instrumental evaluation. J Dermatol Treat
1999; 10:165–169.
97. Lode´n M, Andersson A-C, Lindberg M. Improvement in skin barrier function in patients with
atopic dermatitis after treatment with a moisturizing cream (Canoderm1). Br J Dermatol 1999;
140:264–267.
98. Serup J. A double-blind comparison of two creams containing urea as the active ingredient.
Assessment of efficacy and side-effects by noninvasive techniques and a clinical scoring scheme.
Acta Derm Venereol, (suppl) 1992; 177:34–43.
99. Lode´n M, Andersson A-C, Lindberg M. The effect of two urea-containing creams on dry, eczematous
skin in atopic patients: II adverse effects. J Dermatol Treat 1999; 10:171–175.
100. Gabard B, Nook T, Muller KH. Tolerance of the lesioned skin to dermatological formulations. J Appl
Cosmetol 1991; 9:25–30.
Hydrating Substances
119

=== Page 138 ===
11
Skin Care Products
Howard Epstein
EMD Chemicals Inc., Gibbstown, New Jersey, U.S.A.
AN OVERVIEW OF EMULSION-BASED SKIN CARE PRODUCTS
A variety of skin care products exist in today’s marketplace. They fulfill a variety of functions
by either acting directly on the skin (e.g., moisturizers) or being a cosmetically elegant vehicle
for the delivery of specific active ingredients (e.g., sunscreens or antipuretic or antiacne
medicaments). In general, these products are categorized in the United States into three
functional groups:
l Drugs. To prevent or ameliorate diseases by altering the structure and/or function of
the body.
l Cosmetics. To beautify and improve the feeling or sensory aspects of normal and/or
nondiseased skin. Dry skin would be included in this category.
l Cosmeceuticals. An intermediate classification for cosmetic products that may enhance
the function of the skin. Currently, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not
recognize this category (1).
The three product groups can also be classified by their physical properties. Most
common forms of skin care products are emulsions. Emulsions are mixtures of two insoluble
materials that are stabilized against separation. An example is mixture of oil and water, which
will not mix unless an intermediate emulsifier is incorporated into the mixture.
Different Types of Emulsions
Emulsifiers can act as solubilizers and spreading or dispersing agents. Correct use of
emulsifiers permits one to formulate homogeneous mixtures, dispersions, or emulsions of oily,
waxy substances with water. Solids may be dispersed in liquids or insoluble liquids within
other liquids. Greasy anhydrous ointments can be designed to be more washable. These types
of properties may be achieved by appropriate selection of emulsifiers, active ingredients, and
other compatible ingredients in the vehicle.
Emulsions may be formulated of water in oil (w/o), oil in water (o/w), aqueous gel, and
silicone in water. Other products may be formulated as semisolids containing oleaginous
ingredients, absorption bases, and water-soluble types containing polyethylene glycol (PEG).
Recently, there has been a growing interest in water-in-oil-in-water (w/o/w) emulsions, also
referred to as multiple emulsions.
O/W emulsions are the most commonly formulated. These types of emulsions tend to feel
less greasy and have a lower cost formulation because of a higher water content. W/O emulsions
have historically been less popular because of a characteristic greasy, oily feel on application to
skin. However, the development of newer emulsifiers has enabled a skilled formulator to
develop w/o emulsions of a lighter texture. Silicone formulation aids may also be used to form
stable water-in-silicone (w/Si) or w/o emulsions. These are polymeric surface-active agents with
long bond lengths and wide bond angles. This provides for free rotation of functional groups
permitting formulations of w/o and w/Si emulsions with exceptional elegance and good
coverage when applied to skin (2). This enables formulation of stable emulsions with medium-
to-low viscosity. These different chemical-type emulsions are commonly referred to as vehicles
when “cosmetic”-active or drug-active ingredients are incorporated into them (Table 1).
Not all emulsifiers behave in the same way. Properties of the emulsifier will determine
the emulsion type. Their compatibility with oils having different polarities is also of a critical
concern. Emulsifiers will impact the desired sensory properties of the product such as color,
odor, and desired viscosity (e.g., lotion or cream consistency).

=== Page 139 ===
Different Types of Emulsifiers
Emulsifying agents, which are surface-active agents (surfactants), are available in a wide
range of chemical types. These include nonionic, hydrophobic, lipophilic, ethoxylated, and
nonethoxylated. A recent trend is to lower or even eliminate surfactants in an effort to
minimize the already low irritation potential of the formulation. It is possible to formulate
emulsifier-free emulsions with cross-linked acrylic polymer derivatives. These materials are
hydrophilic polymers that are hydrophobically modified by adding an alkylic chain. These
molecules, known as polymeric emulsifiers, provide additional formulation options for new
product development (4).
FORMULATING HYDRATING CREAMS AND LOTIONS
The continuing development of biophysical instrumentation and test techniques has enabled
formulation of highly effective skin care formulations. Formulators now have several options with
respect to formulating new products. When initiating formulation development, it is important to
understand project/product requirements, type of product(s), performance and aesthetics needs,
formulation cost constraints, packaging needs, product claims, and formulation safety. To what
part of the body will the formulation be applied, and at what time of the day, morning or overnight?
Will makeup be applied over the product; will clothing come into contact with the product? Will
the targeted consumer apply a fragrance to the body after application of the product, and if
so, will the fragrances conflict? Once these requirements are defined, the formulator can
consider active ingredients, emulsion systems, preservative systems, color, and fragrance.
Emulsions allow the formulating chemist to combine otherwise incompatible ingredients
into an effective commercially desirable cosmetic product. The key to product development is
the technique employed to select appropriate raw materials. Commonly used emulsifying agents
are ionic (anionic or cationic) or nonionic. The function of the emulsifying agent is dependent
upon the unique chemical structure of the emulsifier. Each emulsifier has a hydrophilic (water-
loving) and lipophilic (oil-loving) part. Examples of hydrophilic moieties are polyhydric alcohols
and polyethylene chains. Lipophilic parts may be a long hydrocarbon chain such as fatty acids,
cyclic hydrocarbons, or combination of both. Nonionic agents may have hydrophilic action
generated by hydroxyl groups and ether linkages, such as polyoxyethylene chains. Nonionic
emulsifying agents can be neutral or acidic, giving formulators greater flexibility regarding pH
requirements for cosmetic actives. Nonionics can be used in formulating w/o or o/w type
emulsions and will help to mitigate the characteristic oily feel of w/o emulsions.
Thousands of emulsifying agents are available on the world market today. Choosing the
best agent is the key responsibility of the formulator. Many agents used in the cosmetic and
drug industry are classified by a system known as HLB number or hydrophilic-lipophilic
balance number. This system, developed in the mid-1950s, is a useful starting point in
emulsifier selection. In this system, each surfactant having a specific HLB number is used to
emulsify an oil phase having an HLB required for a stable emulsion. Using an emulsifier or
combination of emulsifiers matching the required HLB of the oil phase will form a stable
emulsion. Limitations to this method include incomplete data for required HLBs of many
cosmetic ingredients. Combinations of or single emulsifying agents giving the appropriate
theoretical HLB may not be the optimal combination for emulsion stability or product
Table 1
Examples of Vehicle Types
Type of emulsion
Examples
W/O
Cold creams, cleansing or evening creams (overnight creams)
O/W
Common moisturizers, hand and body lotions
Oleaginous
Petrolatum
Water soluble
Polyethylene glycol-based ointments
Aqueous gels
Lubricating jelly. Gelling agents such as Carbomers1, hydroxyethylcellulose, and
magnesium aluminum silicate may be used in the formulation.
Absorption bases
Hydrophilic petrolatum; these vehicles may contain raw materials able to function as w/o
emulsifiers permitting large quantities of water to be incorporated as emulsified droplets.
Abbreviations: W/O, water in oil; O/W, oil in water.
Source: From Ref. 3.
122
Epstein

=== Page 140 ===
performance. Other emulsifying agents may work better and provide a more elegant
formulation with greater efficacy. In addition, theoretical HLB numbers of complex mixtures
may not follow a linear additive rule specified in the calculation (2).
In this classification system, emulsifying agents with an HLB of 10 would indicate a more
water-soluble agent compared with one having an HLB of 4.
For nonionic detergents of the ester type:
HLB ¼ 20 1  s
a


s ¼ saponification number of the material
a ¼ acid number of the fatty acid moiety of the product
For ethoxylated esters and ethers, when the saponification value is not known:
HLB ¼ E þ P
5
E ¼ percentage of ethylene oxide
P ¼ percentage of polyalcohol in the molecule
When the hydrophobic portion contains phenols and mono-alcohols without poly-
alcohols, the equation can be simplified to:
HLB ¼ E
5
Most nonionics fall into this category; manufacturers who provide HLB values in their
product specifications most frequently use the latter formula (Table 2).
Mixtures of anionic and nonionic agents obtain the best emulsion; mixtures of cationic
and nonionic emulsifiers may not be as elegant. Examples of nonionic emulsifiers are alcohol
ethoxylates, alkylphenol ethoxylates, block polymers, ethoxylated fatty acids, sorbitan esters,
ethoxylated sorbitan esters, and ethoxylated castor oil. The solubility of nonionic surfactants in
water can often be used as a guide in approximating the HLB and usefulness.
Oil-in-Water Emulsions
O/W emulsions typically contain 10% to 35% oil phase; a lower-viscosity emulsion may have
an oil phase reduced to 5% to 15%. Water in the external phase of the emulsion helps hydrate
the stratum corneum of the skin. This is desirable when one desires to incorporate water-
soluble active ingredients in the vehicle. Oil droplets in emulsions have a lower density than
the phase they are suspended in. To have a stable emulsion, it is important to adjust the
specific gravity of the oil and water phases as closely as possible. Viscosity of the water phase
(external phase) may be increased to impede the upward migration of the oil particles.
Table 2
Relationship Between HLB Range and Water Solubility
Water solubility
HLB range
No dispersibility in water
1–4
Poor dispersion
3–6
Milky dispersion after agitation
6–8
Stable milky dispersion
8–10
Translucent to clear dispersion
10–13
Clear solution
13+
HLB
Application
4–6
W/O emulsifier
7–9
Wetting agent
8–18
O/W emulsifier
13–15
Detergent
15–18
Solubilizer
Abbreviations: HLB, hydrophilic-lipophilic balance; W/O, water in
oil; O/W, oil in water.
Source: From Ref. 5.
Skin Care Products
123

=== Page 141 ===
Addition of waxes to the oil phase will increase specific gravity, but may have a profound
effect on the appearance, texture, and feel on application to skin of the product. Increasing
water phase viscosity is one of the most common approaches. Natural thickeners (alginates,
caragenates, xanthan) and cellulosic (carboxymethyl cellulose) gums are used for this purpose.
Carbopol1 resin is perhaps the most popular gum thickener for contributing toward
emulsion stability, especially at higher temperatures. The addition of a fatty amine to a
Carbopol resin will further enhance stability by strengthening the interface of the water and oil
phases through partial solubilization into the oil droplets. Electrolytes and cationic materials
will have a destabilizing effect on anionic sodium carboxymethyl cellulose and should not be
used together. Veegum, an inorganic aluminum silicate material is also commonly used to
thicken emulsions. Carbopol and Veegum may be used together to modify the characteristic
draggy feel of Carbopol when used at the higher levels.
Emulsifier blends with HLBs ranging from 7 to 16 are used for forming o/w emulsions. In
the blend, the hydrophilic emulsifier should be formulated as the predominate emulsifier to
obtain the best emulsion. A popular emulsifier, glycerol monostearate and polyoxyethylene
stearate blend is a self-emulsifying, acid-stable blend. Emulsifiers are called self-emulsifying when
an auxiliary anionic or nonionic emulsifier is added for easier emulsification of the formulation.
Formulating with self-emulsifying materials containing nonionic emulsifiers permits a wide range
of ingredient choice for the formulator, especially with acid systems. In alkaline formulations,
polyoxyethylene ether type emulsifiers are preferred with respect to emulsion stability.
An alternative to glycerol monostearate self-emulsifying emulsifier is emulsifying wax,
National Formulary (NF). This emulsifier, when used with a fatty alcohol, will form viscous
liquids to creams depending on the other oil-phase ingredients. Use levels may vary from 2% to
15%; at lower levels, a secondary emulsifier such as the oleths or PEG glycerides will give good
stability. This system is good for stabilizing electrolyte emulsions or when other ionic materials are
formulated into the vehicle. Polysorbates are o/w emulsifiers, wetting agents, and solubilizers
that are often used with cetyl or stearyl alcohol at 0.5% to 5.0% to produce o/w emulsions (6).
Water-in-Oil Emulsions
Although less popular than o/w emulsions, these systems may be desirable when greater
release of a medicating agent or the perception of greater emolliency is desired. Emulsifiers
having an HLB range of 2.5 to 6 are frequently selected. When multiple emulsifiers are used,
the predominant one is generally lipophilic with a smaller quantity of a hydrophilic emulsifier.
These emulsions typically have a total of 45% to 80% oil phase.
During the last few years, formulators have become interested in more elegant w/o
emulsions by formulating with new emulsifying agents, e.g., emollient such as esters, Guerbet
alcohols, and silicones. Selection of a suitable emollient depends on ability of the material to
spread on skin with low tack, dermal compatibility, and perceived elegance by the user. In
achieving this elegance, some researchers suggest a correlation of emollient and molecular weight
of the emollients. In these studies, viscosity of w/o creams has correlated with molecular
weight of the emollients used in test formulations. High molecular weight coemulsifiers
formulated with high molecular weight emollients gave more stable w/o emulsions. The
polarity of the emollients used was found to be important as well. Emollients or mixtures of
emollients with medium polarity gave test lotions the most desirable stability results (7).
Anionic emulsifiers are generally inefficient w/o emulsion stabilizers, because more surface-
active agents are often needed to stabilize these emulsions. Sorbitan stearates and oleates are
effective emulsifiers when used at 0.5% to 5.0%; sorbitan isostearates, being branched chain
materials, give a very uniform particle size for w/o emulsions.
Multiple Emulsions
Multiple emulsions are of interest to the skin care formulator because of the elegant
appearance and less greasy feel of these formulation types. Two types of multiple emulsions
are encountered in skin care, w/o/w, where the internal and external water phases are
separated by oil, and oil-in-water-in-oil (o/w/o), where the water phase separates the two oil
phases. The method of preparation for each multiple emulsion type is similar.
Benefits of these types of formulations are the claimed sustained release of entrapped
materials in the internal phase and separation of various incompatible ingredients in the same
formulation.
124
Epstein

=== Page 142 ===
A suggested technique for forming a w/o/w emulsion is to first create a w/o primary
emulsion by combining water as one phase with oil and a lipophilic emulsifier as the second phase
in the traditional method. Next, water and a hydrophilic emulsifier is combined with the w/o
primary emulsion at room or warm (i.e., 408C) temperature with mixing forming a w/o/w multiple
emulsion. These emulsions typically contain about 18% to 23% oil and 3% to 8% lipophilic
emulsifier. The continuous oily phase is stabilized with about 0.5% to 0.8% magnesium sulfate. W/O
emulsifiers have an HLB less than 6 and are frequently nonionic or polymeric. O/W emulsifiers have
an HLB greater than 15 and are ionic with high interfacial activity. For o/w/o multiple emulsions,
w/o emulsifiers have an HLB less than 6 with similar properties as a w/o/w w/o emulsifier. O/W
emulsifiers have an HLB greater than 15 and are nonionic with lower interfacial activity.
Water-in-Silicone Emulsions
Silicone compounds have evolved into a class of specialty materials used for replacement,
substitutes, or enhancers for a variety of organic surface-active agents, resulting in the ability to
formulate products with unique properties. Previously, silicone compounds were available
as water-insoluble oily materials almost exclusively. Newer silicone compounds such as
polyethylene-oxide bases grafted to polydimethylsiloxane hydrophobic polymers, known as
dimethicone copolyol emulsifiers, have been developed. These types of emulsifiers permit
formation of water-in-cyclomethicone emulsions. Further work in this field led to adding
hydrocarbon chains to silicone polyether polymers. This resulted in improved aesthetics to oil in
silicone emulsions as well. Silicone copolyols exhibit high surface activity and function similarly to
traditional emulsifiers. Unlike hydrocarbon emulsifiers with higher molecular weights, high
molecular weight silicone emulsifiers can remain fluid. This gives very stable viscoelastic films at
the water/oil interface. The ability to make silicones more formulator-friendly has led to
development of several new silicone-based surfactants. Both a water-soluble and an oil-soluble
portion are needed to make a surface-active molecule. Silicone surfactants substitute or add on
silicone-based hydrophobicity creating a distinctive skin feel and other attributes of typical silicones
as well as attributes of fatty surfactants. These emulsions may be prepared in a traditional two-
phase method, e.g., 2% to 3% weight/weight (w/w) of laurylmethicone copolyol in 23% w/w oil
phase can be mixed in a separate water phase with electrolyte to form a hydrating cream (8).
Water-Soluble Ointment Bases
PEG polymers are available in a variety of molecular weights. These materials are water-soluble
and do not hydrolyze or support mold growth. For these reasons, PEGs make good bases for
washable ointments and can be formulated to have a soft-to-hard consistency. PEGs dissolve in
water to form clear solutions; they are also soluble in organic solvents. PEG ointment Unites States
Pharmacopeia (USP) is a mixture of PEG 3350 and PEG 400 heated to 658C, cooled, and mixed until
congealed. To formulate a water-soluble ointment base, water and stearyl alcohol may be
incorporated into this base.
Absorption Bases and Petrolatum
Absorption bases can serve as concentrates for w/o emollients; water may be added to
anhydrous absorption bases to form a cream-like consistency. Petrolatum, a component of
some absorption bases, has been shown to be absorbed into delipidized skin and to accelerate
barrier recovery. Bases can be made washable by addition of a hydrophilic emulsifier. For
example, formulation with polysorbate-type emulsifiers with polyoxypropylene fatty ethers
will improve washability. These surfactants will form o/w emulsions with rubbing on skin.
W/O petrolatum creams can be formulated by mixing 50% to 55% petrolatum with a sorbitan
sesquioleate at 5% to 10% having an HLB of about 3 to 7 in one phase and water in a second
phase. Both phases are blended at 678C to 708C with mixing.
OTHER INGREDIENTS
Consumer-perceived benefits of a cream or lotion are often a result of ingredients remaining on
the skin after water and other volatile materials have evaporated. Emollients and other skin
conditioners are commonly used for this reason. Following are frequently used ingredients to
modify the feel of the emulsion on skin (Table 3).
Skin Care Products
125

=== Page 143 ===
Preservative Systems
Most formulations require preservative systems to control microbial growth. Microbial
contamination with pathogenic microorganisms can pose a health risk to the consumer,
especially from Pseudomonas infection in the eyes or from an existing illness. Microbial
contamination may cause an emulsion to separate and/or form off-odors. Contaminated
products are also subject to recall, which is undesirable from a commercial viewpoint.
Preservatives can be divided into two groups: formaldehyde donors and those that
cannot produce formaldehyde. The former group includes DMDM hydantoin, diazolidinyl
urea, imidazolidinyl urea, quaternium 15, and the parabens (esters of p-hydroxybenzoic acid),
whereas preservatives such as Kathon GC, phenoxyethanol, and iodopropunyl butylcarbamate
work by alternative mechanisms. The formulator is advised to consult appropriate preserva-
tive manufacturers to select the optimal preservative system for the emulsion (Table 4).
Table 3
Examples of Moisturizer Ingredients and Their Functions
Ingredient
Use level (%)
Comments
Emollient esters
5–25
Modify the oily, greasy feel of mineral oil and
petrolatum, light-to-moderate feel on skin.
Triglyceride oils
5–0
Light-to-heavy feel, often used as spreading
agents.
Mineral oil/petrolatum
5–70
Heavy, oily feel, provides occlusion for
appropriate vehicles.
Silicone oils
0.1–15.0
Helps to prevent soaping of formulations,
improves spread on skin, is water
repellent, and has skin-protective
properties.
Humectants (Glycerin, Propylene Glycol,
Sorbitol, Polyethylene glycol)
0.5–15.0
Moisture-binding properties help retard
evaporation of water from formulation,
control viscosity, and impact body and feel
of emulsion.
Thickeners (Carbopol1, Veegum)
0.1–2.0
Help obtain viscosity, enhance stability,
bodying agents.
Table 4
Examples of Emulsifiers
Nonionic
Polyoxyethylene fatty alcohol ethers
Very hydrophobic to slightly hydrophobic
Polyglycol fatty acid esters
Very hydrophobic to slightly hydrophobic
Polyoxyethylene modified fatty acid esters
Very hydrophilic to slightly hydrophilic
Cholesterol and fatty acid esters
Slightly lipophilic to strong lipophilic
Glyceryl dilaurate
Secondary emulsifier
Glycol stearate
Secondary emulsifier
Anionic
Disodium laureth sulfosuccinate
Sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate
Alcohol ether sulfate
Sodium alkylaryl sulfonate
Cationic
PEG-alkyl amines
Quaternary ammonium salts
Self-emulsifying bases (form o/w emulsions)
PEG-20 stearate and cetearyl alcohol
Cetearyl alcohol and polysorbate 20
Glyceryl stearate SE
Absorption bases
Lanolin alcohol and mineral oil and octyldodecanol
Petrolatum and ozokerite and mineral oil
Abbreviation: PEG, polyethylene glycol.
126
Epstein

=== Page 144 ===
SKIN CARE EMULSIONS FOR THE AGING POPULATION
Consumers frequently refer to young skin as having a healthy glow, radiance, or vitality that
tends to diminish over time. These changes in appearance in part are related to the diminished
ability of older skin to retain moisture. Cosmetic and cosmeceutical products that address the
needs of the aging population by enhancing appearance are predicted to grow in product sales
at twice the rate of the overall cosmetic market in the near future (9).
Early moisturizers were formulated primarily with lipids on the basis of the assumption
that fats and oils make the skin soft and supple. In reality, it is difficult to specify exactly how
much water content of skin is required for adequate moisturization. The water content of
keratinocytes in the basal layer is about 70%. This decreases to about 15% to 20% as mature
stratum corneum reaches the desquamating layers (10). Current moisturizing strategy is to:
l Increase water-holding capacity of the stratum corneum by external application of
hydroscopic ingredients, known as humectants. These ingredients act in the same way
as natural moisturizing factor (NMF) in skin; some materials used in moisturizers such
as lactic acid and urea are components of NMF.
l Hold water in the stratum corneum by deposition of a water-insoluble oily material on
the skin surface; these materials are known as occlusive agents. Oily materials mimic
the effect of the natural lipid bilayers of the skin to restrict evaporation from the
surface, i.e., petrolatum.
In general, required levels of occlusive agents are relatively high and will cause a
formulation to become tacky when applied to skin. Emulsification of occlusive agents in
combination with hydroscopic agents can reduce the ability of the agent to be effectively
occlusive in the finished product. Humectants are used to improve moisturization of the skin,
but there are conditions when humectants may actually deprive the skin of water. Once a
humectant has absorbed water, the activity coefficient of water is lowered. “If the water in skin
tissue does not have a lower water activity compared to the surrounding humectant-water
blend, water molecules will not be transferred to skin.” Consideration should be given in the
selection of humectant to ensure that the formulation does not hamper the enzyme-controlled
normal desquamatory process. Glycerin is frequently the humectant of choice for this reason.
More recent formulations contain hydrophilic polymers (Table 5) that may function as
humectants and help smooth skin as well (10) (Table 6).
Table 5
Hydrophilic Polymers Used in Skin Care Moisturizers
Alginic Acid
Chitosan (and salts)
Collagen
Hyaluronic Acid
Source: From Ref. 10.
Table 6
Examples of Common Skin Care Moisturizing and Conditioning Agents
Emollients
Humectants
Occlusives
Acetylated lanolin
Acetamide MEA
Acetylated lanolin alcohol
C14-15 alcohols
Ammonium lactate
Caprylic/capric triglyceride
Dimethicone copolyol
Copper PCA
Cetyl ricinoleate
Hexyl laurate
Glucuronic acid
Dimethicone
Isopropyl myristate
Glycerin
Hydrogenated lanolin
Lanolin
PCA
Mineral oil
PPG-20 cetyl ether
Propylene glycol
Myristol myristate
Squalene
Sodium PCA
Petrolatum
Sucrose oleate
Sorbitol
Soybean lipid
Wheat germ glycerides
Urea
Squalane
Source: From Ref. 10.
Skin Care Products
127

=== Page 145 ===
Emulsion formulators are aware that the health of the epidermis may be affected by
l the intracorneal lipid layer, its formation, hydrolysis, and oxidation;
l enzymatic dependency of synthesis of NMF; and
l climatic changes.
A disadvantage of formulating with glycerin-based moisturizers is that they are poor
solvents for cosmetic lipids (10). When it is desirable to have a lipophiloic “cosmetic active” in
the formulation, the formulator must use skill and experience to optimize the formulation.
FORMULATING FOR IMMEDIATE IMPROVEMENT IN
APPEARANCE AND TEXTURE OF SKIN
Various strategies are available to formulate emulsions that provide immediate cosmetic
benefits to skin. Epidermis of young skin is translucent; it allows light to partially pass through
it. Skin that appears translucent will exhibit a shine or glow. The layer between the epidermis
and dermis has ridges known as rete pegs. In aging skin, this region becomes smaller and
flatter, tending to reduce the translucent effect of skin. Further, keratinocytes at the surface of
the skin do not slough off as quickly. This results in skin that has a dull and uneven
appearance. Other contributing factors to loss of “skin glow or radiance” are the irregular
pattern of melanocytes that tends to develop in aging skin.
In normal daylight, one observes light that is partially reflected from the surface of
stratum corneum and light that is partly reflected back from the dermis. Younger-looking skin
will reflect light from lower epidermis and blood vessels in the dermis with color contributed
from melanin and hemoglobin. Incident light reflecting off dry skin will not penetrate as
deeply and reflect back with a dull appearance.
Interference Pigments
One approach to altering the way light is reflected back from skin is to formulate with
interference pigments. This approach initially used in facial products has recently found
popularity in body moisturizers. Effect-enhancing pigments are used to “add natural,
transparent luster to skin”; they can improve the tactile qualities of the skin by giving the
emulsion a silky feel. The same effect-enhancing pigments may be used to impart an elegant
luster to the appearance of the product (11).
Effect pigments are composed of thin, translucent platelets that produce luster by
partially reflecting and partially transmitting light. Pigments are available as natural pearl,
mica, and bismuth oxychloride-based materials. Bismuth oxychloride crystals have a
“brilliant” white pearlescense; some grades create metallic effects while other grades provide
a “subtle luster and smooth feel.” Natural pearls can provide a “satiny luster” to emulsions.
Metal oxide-coated mica pigments with thin films of iron oxide or titanium dioxide are most
commonly used. The colors in these materials will shift with the viewing angle to create
complex iridescence on curved body surfaces. Smaller platelets provide a “satiny-smooth, silky
luster, while larger ones provide sparkle, glitter, and a lively appearance (11).” Use of
appropriate particle size and color combinations can give the skin a “radiant glow.”
Interference pigments are formulated in skin care products at levels of 0.1% to 2.0% by
weight, depending upon the qualities the formulator wishes to achieve. The selection of
particle size can help diminish the appearance of age spots, fine lines, and uneven skin color.
Interference effects are maximized when a variety of particle sizes are formulated.
Soft Focus Effects
Fine particles, such as microspheres, are used in emulsions and anhydrous formulations to
enhance the feel and appearance of skin. The chemical compositions of microspheres are
diverse. Examples are polymethyl methacrylate, polyethylene, ethylene/acrylayes copolymer,
nylon, polyurethane, silicone resins, and silica. Selection of the appropriate material can
provide “optical blurring” effects to the formulation, minimizing the appearance of fine lines
and uneven skin tone. Some skin care products can deposit a transparent layer on the skin,
making fine lines more visible to the eye. Formulation with appropriate microspheres can help
128
Epstein

=== Page 146 ===
to minimize this effect and give the skin an enhanced appearance (12). Formulating with
varied particle size will further help minimize the appearance of uneven skin (13).
When formulating with interference pigments and soft focus materials, a critical
consideration is the refractive index (RI) of the primary vehicle and the material(s) to be
incorporated into the vehicle. When the vehicle is applied to skin, the portion of the vehicle
remaining on the skin after evaporation is considered the “primary vehicle.” For example, an
emulsion of oils and polymers applied to skin, the oil/polymer portion will be the primary
vehicle after the water has evaporated from the skin’s surface. In general, the RI of the light-
diffusing particle must be greater than that of the skin and the vehicle to be effective (Table 7).
Emollient Esters
Chemically, esters are the covalent compounds formed between acids and alcohols. Esters can
be formed from inorganic and carboxylic acids and any alcohol. Esters, when formulated in
cosmetic emulsions, have diverse functions. They serve as emollients, skin conditioners,
solvents, fragrance compounds, and preservatives (14).
More recently, emollient esters have been used in place of more expensive silicones to
provide aesthetic benefits to cosmetic emulsions. Esters can be formulated with silicones to
enhance stability and feel of the emulsion when applied to skin (15). Esters that function as co-
emulsifiers provide improved skin adhesion of the reduced formulation tackiness and can
improve hydration properties of humectants.
Esters display properties that reflect their chain length and structural arrangement of
their two starting materials. For this reason, different esters will have differing emollience. A
simple monoester of a short-chain fatty alcohol or acid will possess a light feel. Branched esters
will feel nongreasy; chemically more “complex” pentaerythrityl esters will have a “cushiony
feel” (14). The structural composition of the ester will also affect its spreading behavior on skin.
Branched esters typically have a higher spreading factor. Spreading will begin to decrease as
the molecular weight increases. Emollient esters affect the viscosity of the emulsion, either
improving texture and formulation aesthetics or detracting if incorrectly formulated. When
formulating with coated pigments, one must ensure that the selected ester is compatible with
the coating. Another consideration is the pH of the finished product. Below a pH of 3.4, esters
tend to hydrolyze, resulting in a product that may develop an undesirable odor (16).
Polymers
Polymers are small molecules that are chemically connected in long repeating units. Polymers
are ubiquitous in nature. The DNA of all living cells and the protein and starches in our foods
as well as the tires of our automobiles are all composed of polymers. The use and function of
polymers in cosmetic emulsions are equally diverse. Polymeric emulsifiers, such as those
based on silicone or polyacrylic acids, are used as emulsifiers. These polymers have cationic
charges that are substantive to skin and impart a smooth, conditioning effect. Others polymers
are formulated in emulsions to create the sensation of firming skin, minimize interference
pigments and other solid particles from rub off to clothing, and provide water resistance to
sunscreen containing emulsions. These polymers form a film on the skin’s surface (Table 8).
Table 7
Examples of Refractive Indexes (Various Sources)
Material
Refractive index
Air
1.00
Perspiration
1.33
Polyethylene
1.45
Titanium dioxide
2.51
PMMA
1.49
Silica
1.45
Skin
1.62
Microspheres (general)
1.41–1.53
Propylene glycol dibenzoate (ester)
1.54
Phenyl trimethicone (silicone)
1.46
PPG-3 benzyl ether myristate (ester)
1.465
Dimethicones, cyclomethicones (silicone)
1.375–1.403, 1.394–1.398
Skin Care Products
129

=== Page 147 ===
FORMULATING EFFECTIVE COSMECEUTICALS FOR AN AGING POPULATION
An aging consumer population seeks products to address fine lines and wrinkles, improve
the appearance of an uneven skin tone, smoothen rough-textured skin, and reduce skin
dispigmentation referred to as “age spots.” Advances in molecular biology have enabled
research investigators to develop numerous in vitro screening protocols demonstrating the
potential of various cosmeceutical ingredients to help improve the appearance of aging skin.
Peptides, Vitamin Derivatives, Botanicals
In vitro data may produce very dramatic results supporting efficacy of cosmeceutical agents.
Many of these agents must be properly formulated and should be properly tested in vivo to
confirm they will function as desired to meet consumer expectations. Cosmeceutical agents
must be compatible and stable in the vehicle they are formulated in to be effective. For
example, peptides are available with variations in the number of amino acids and sequence.
The peptide must be designed to have the ability to penetrate skin in order to be effective. One
approach is to add a lipohilic chain, such as a palmitate (Table 9), to the peptide. A copper
peptide is commercially available; to be effective, it must be formulated at significantly higher
levels compared with the palmitoyl pentapeptide (17–19).
Published literature supports claims that retinoic acid improves the appearance of
wrinkles, promotes collagen formation, and evens skin tone. Retinoic acid has limited stability,
and consumers frequently experience dry, irritated skin during product use. To promote
stability, formulation exposure to oxygen and light should be minimal. Formulating with an
antioxidant and encapsulation of the retinoic acid are other options. The primary package
should be designed to be oxygen and light impermeable. Irritation potential may be reduced
by formulating with an appropriate retinoic acid derivative. Retinol is better tolerated by skin
than trans-retinoic acid (20). Incorporation of anti-inflammatory agents may further mitigate
irritation. Sugar amines such as glucosamine and N-acetyl-glucosamine can help hydrate skin
and reduce fine lines/wrinkles and facial hyperpigmentation. Glucosamine tends to be
unstable in formulations formulating with antioxidants, and at an acidic pH it may help
overcome this problem (21). Formulations with glycolic acid are associated with an increase in
sensitivity to solar exposure and sunburn cell formation in skin. For this reason, products with
glycolic acids should also contain sunscreens.
Medicinal and cosmetic use of botanicals has a long history spanning many centuries.
Selection of a botanical is influenced by experience passed on from generation to generation.
Despite this long history of use, traditional medicine has not been officially recognized by
many countries (22). In recent years, interest has increased regarding use of botanicals in
skin care. Data addressing safety, quality, efficacy, and guidelines for formulating with
botanicals to achieve optimal benefits are lacking. The formulator of botanical-based products
Table 8
Examples of Polymers (Various Sources)
Polymer
Type
Potential application
Acrylates/C10-30 alkyl acrylate
cross-polymer
High molecular weight polyacrylate
Primary emulsification (O/W)
Carbomer
Acrylic acid
Synthetic thickener
Acrylates/steareth-20 methracylate
copolymers
Acrylic polymer emulsion/anionic
Thickener
PEG-150/decyl alcohol/SMDI
copolymer
Hydrophobically modified
nonionic polyol
Low pH formulations, cationic
conditioners, O/W sunscreens,
cationic silicone emulsions
Caprrylic/capric triglyceride sodium
acrylates copolymer
Polyacrylic acid
W/O emulsions
PVP/eicosine copolymer
Copolymers of vinylpyrrolidone
Oil soluble, rub resistance
in sunscreen
Tricontanyl PVP
Copolymer of vinylpyrolidone
Oil soluble, rub resistance for
pigments and sunscreens
Abbreviations: W/O, water in oil; O/W, oil in water.
Source: From Ref. 14.
130
Epstein

=== Page 148 ===
Table 9
Cosmeceutical Ingredients
Ingredient
Claimed benefit
Mechanism
Formulation consideration
Botanicals: soy, green tea, pomegranate,
red clover, curcumin, resveratrol
(in skin and seeds of grapes)
Soy: skin tone evening, improvement
in dyspigmentation
Inhibition of PAR-2 activation
by protease inhibitors
Source of soy important.
Green tea: UVB-induced formation
of thymine dimers (a marker for
DNA damage) inhibited a 5%
pretreatment prior to UVB exposure
inhibited keratinocyte damage
Quenching of reactive oxygenating
species (ROS); also, modulation
of NF-kb pathway, a signal
transduction pathway responsive
to UV radiation
Green tea extract tested in vivo,
applied topically to skin in a solution
of ethanol or water. A 5% GTP solution
was effective, 10% was optimal (1–10%
solutions demonstrated a dose-dependent
response) (23).
Milk thistle (silibinin)
Protect skin from UVR
Antioxidant, free radical scavenger,
downregulates chemically induced
lipoxygenase, TNFa, and IL-1a
in mouse skin.
Hydroxyacids, e.g., Alpha, beta, poly,
and bionic acids
Photoaging and hyperkeratosis (age
spots and hyperkeratotic lesions)
Antioxidant
pH of final product is low,  4.0 hydrolysis
of esters in formulation will occur causing
an off-odor.
Increased dermal thickness
Bionic acid inhibits matrix
metalloproteinase enzyme activity
responsible for degradation
of skin’s matrix and structural
integrity (wrinkle formation, skin
laxity, and telangiectasia)
Sun sensitivity with a and b Acids.
Increased production of collagen
and fibroblast proliferation
Peptides, e.g., palmitoyl pentapeptide
Improve appearance of fine lines
and wrinkles of the eye area
Stimulation of type I and type III
collagens and fibronectin
production
Peptide lipidated to penetrate skin.
(Continued)
Skin Care Products
131

=== Page 149 ===
Table 9
Cosmeceutical Ingredients (Continued )
Ingredient
Claimed benefit
Mechanism
Formulation consideration
Other peptides, e.g., acetyl
hexapeptide-3
Wrinkle reduction
(limited data available)
Inhibits calcium-dependent
catecholamine release from
and assembly of SNARE
protein complex
Short amino acid sequence to facilitate cell
membrane permeability.
Miscellaneous vitamins:
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid, ascorbyl
phosphate)
Wrinkle reduction, improvement
in skin tone evening and texture
Improvement in skin collagen,
reduced pigment transfer from
melanocyte to keratinocyte
Stability, proper formulation pH, penetration
into skin.
Vitamin B3 (niacinamide and
its esters)
Improved skin tone, reduced
dyspigmentation
Antioxidant
Formulate at appropriate pH to avoid
hydrolysis.
Vitamin E (tocopherol and tocopherol
acetate)
Protection against UV-induced
effects to skin, reduced
inflammation of skin
Antioxidant
Stability against oxidation, oil-soluble forms
are less elegant, acetate form is subject
to hydrolysis in formulation.
Retinoic acid (functional form
of vitamin A)
Wrinkle reduction via thickened
skin.
Increased epidermal thickness
and ground substance inhibit
collagenase production.
Oxygen and light render material unstable.
Antioxidants may improve stability.
Reduce appearance of
dyspigmentation
Reduce expression of tyrosinase
Sugar amine, e.g.,
N-acetyl-glucosamine
Moisturization, reduce fine
lines/wrinkles
Precursor of hyaluronic acid, a
water-binding component of skin
Tends to be unstable, creating a brown
colored product.
Improve skin tone
Inhibits tyrosinase, thus inhibiting
melanin production
132
Epstein

=== Page 150 ===
in addition to information supplied by the manufacturer is advised to consult other resources
such as the World Health Organization (22), Journal of Nutrition (24), and other reliable
published data.
Two promising groups of botanically derived agents appear to hold promise, as
chemotherapeutic treatments for aging skin are polyphenolic antioxidants (catechins and
flavonols) and isoflavones. Green tea contains epigallocatein-3-gallate (EGCG), and grape seed
contains polyphenolic antioxidants. Silymarin found in milk thistle and genistein found in
soybean extract are other examples of useful ingredients for photoaging (25).
Many botanical extracts are available to the formulator. Plant constituents of extracts
vary with respect to chemical compounds. Variations in solubility and stability have potential
to cause shelf life and stability challenges of the finished product over time. Many extracts
have a dark color or an odor that may create aesthetic concerns. Extraction methods intended
to lighten color or mitigate odor may remove a compound with the desired activity. To
minimize aesthetic and stability concerns, formulators should consult with the extract
manufacturer regarding availability of technical information addressing polarity of plant-
derived oils and optimal formulation pH range for extracts containing alkaloids. Botanically
derived lipids are often not hydrogenated and are subject to oxidation promoting product
rancidity (26). Pharmaceutical grade extracts are typically 5 to 10 times stronger than cosmetic
grade extracts. Cosmetic extracts may be aesthetically acceptable in emulsions. They may lack
key desirable chemical constituents. Alternatively, pharmaceutical grade extracts are very
resinous, dark in color, and not soluble in many cosmetic formulations (27).
Notes from a Herbalist: Formulating with Botanical Extracts
A tincture is a solution of soluble plant constituents in a solvent known as the menstrum. Poor
filtration, exposure to light, temperature changes from warm to cold, or chemical degradation
of extractives can cause precipitation to occur. The precipitate may contain active constituents
or inert proteins. Precipitation can be minimized by storage at constant temperature and
avoidance of exposure to light. Massive precipitation, development of a marked color
change, and “off” odor indicate that the tincture should be discarded. Alkaloids in extracts
have diverse medicinal benefits. Acidification of the extraction solvent may increase
potency, but efficacy may be neutralized by mixing with tannins. Glycerine is commonly
used as an extraction solvent when it is undesirable to use alcohol. This type of extract is
referred to as a glycerite. Glycerites tend to be less potent than alcoholic extracts and have a
shorter shelf life.
Vegetable oils are good extraction solvents for many plant constituents. Herbalists
are concerned that they are also good solvents for pesticides and herbicides. For this reason it
is advisable to formulate with organic certified organic vegetable oils, ideally cold-pressed
oils (28).
FUTURE FORMULATION CHALLENGES
Cosmeceutical ingredients have been popular for many years, and new cosmetic active agents
are continuously being identified. Many of these active ingredients have excellent in vitro
data to support claims, but are lacking in vivo data. Further, formulators often formulate the
active in an existing prototype rather than employing a strategy of formulation optimization.
Consumers have come to expect functional cosmetic products. Products that fail to deliver on
consumer expectations are unlikely to succeed long term in the marketplace (29).
Future formulation challenges will be to:
l Determine the optimal emulsion system to effectively deliver the desired ingredient to
the viable epidermis via the stratum corneum (partition coefficients, penetrant
polarity).
l Understand the influence of formulation characteristics on skin delivery (influence of
the emulsifier, solubility characteristics of the primary emollient, or solvent and
influence of emollients in general).
l Continuously advance regarding knowledge of skin molecular biology, specifically the
intended region of product use on the body.
Skin Care Products
133

=== Page 151 ===
REFERENCES
1. Vermeer BJ, Gilchrest B. Cosmeceuticals: a proposal for rational definition, evaluation, and regulation.
Arch Dermatol 1996; 132(3):340.
2. Kasprzak R. Drug and Cosmetic Industry. Illinois: Allured, 1966.
3. Block H. Medicated applications. In: Gennaro AR, ed. Remington’s Pharmaceutical Sciences, 18th ed.,
Pennsylvania: Mack Publishing Company, 1980.
4. Konish PN, Gruber JV. J Soc Cosmet Sci 1998; 49:335–342.
5. The HLB System. ICI Americas, Inc. 1984.
6. Emulsification of Basic Cosmetic Ingredients. ICI United States, Inc. 102-6, 8/75.
7. Henkel Symposium. 1991.
8. Silicone Formulation Aids. Dow Corning. 1997.
9. Mouche C. Industry Watch: Consumer Products. 2002. Available at: www.chemicalprocessing.com.
10. Rieger MM, ed. Harry’ Cosmeticology, 8th ed. New York: Chemical Publishing Comp., Inc, 2000.
11. Uzunian G. Formulating effect pigments in personal care products. Happi 1999; 36(88):98–101.
12. H Epstein et al. US Patent 5,804,205. Sept 8, 1998.
13. Leon-Pekarek D. Kobo Products, Inc.; Discussions; July 2002.
14. International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook, 9th ed. The Cosmetic, Toiletry and
Fragrance Ass, Inc.; Washington DC, 2002.
15. Croda Bulletin DS-173 R-1; Oct 23, 2003.
16. Obukowho P, Woldin B. Selecting the right emollient ester. Cosmet Toiletr 2001; 116(8):61–72.
17. Robinson LR, Fitzgerald NC, Doughty DG, et al. Topical palmitoyl pentapeptide provides
improvement in photodamaged human facial skin. Int J Cos Sci 2005; 27:155–160.
18. Foldvari M, Attah-Poku S, Hu J, et al. Palmitoyl derivatives of interferon alpha: potent for cutaneous
delivery. J Pharm Sci 1998; 87:1203–1208.
19. Leyden JJ, Grove G, Barkovic S, et al. The effect of tripeptide to copper ratio in two copper peptide
creams on photodamaged facial skin. Am Acad Dermatol Annual Meeting Poster 2002; 67.
20. Oblong JE, Bissett DL. Retinoids. In: Draelos ZD, ed. Cosmeceuticals. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders
2005:35–42.
21. Kanwischer M, Kim S-Y, Kim JS, et al. Evaluation of the physicochemical stability and skin
permeation of glucosamine sulfate. Drug Devel Ind Pharm 2005; 31:91–97.
22. Ernst E. Prevalence of use of complementary/alternative medicine: a systematic review. Bull World
Health Organ 2000; 78(2):252–257.
23. Katiyar SK, Mukhtar H. Tea antioxidants in cancer chemoprevention. J cell Biochem (suppl) 1997;
27:59–67.
24. Mahady GB. Global harmonization of herbal health claims. Am Soc for Nutritional Sci 2001; 1120S–
1123S.
25. Spencer JM. Chemoprevention of skin cancer and photoaging. Cos Dermatol 2001; 25:25–28.
26. Imokawa G, Rieger M. Specialty lipids. In: Reiger M, ed. Harry’s Cosmeticology 8th ed. New York:
Chemical Publishing Comp., Inc., 2000.
27. D’Amelio FS. Preparations. In: Botanicals: A Phytocosmetic Desk Reference. New York: CRC Press,
1999.
28. Cech R. Herbal oils, salves, and creams. In: Making Plant Medicine. Oregon: Horizon Herbs LLC,
2000:82.
29. Wiechers JW, Kelly CL, Blease TG, et al. Formulating for efficacy. Cosmeti Toiletr 2004; 119(3):49–62.
134
Epstein

=== Page 152 ===
12
Tests for Skin Hydration
Bernard Gabard
iderma Scientific Consulting, Basel, Switzerland
INTRODUCTION
Writing about skin hydration means writing simultaneously about dry skin and its treatment
by moisturizers (1). Dry skin has never really been defined in a repeatable way. In fact, this
expression prejudices into believing that the skin does have reduced water content, although
this was never confirmed or denied. Hopefully, the recent availability of near-InfraRed (IR)-
based water measurement will now allow to resolve this issue (2).
Experimental models used for measuring skin hydration are basically clinical models
using or not using noninvasive bioengineering measurements. To ensure meaningful results,
the outlines of the intended studies should be of modern design, incorporating blinding,
randomization, and a suitable statistical control (particularly if different products are to be
compared). This last point means including a predetermined adequate number of subjects in
the study. The general ethical and legal frames of such clinical studies required for claim
support are well defined in corresponding monographs or publications covering extensively
the general procedures to be followed and the prerequisite information needed about the
products to be tested (3,4).
Regardless of the method used, a further important point concerns standardization of the
experimental conditions. To obtain acceptable and reproducible results, measurements should
be performed with relaxed patients and/or volunteers already acclimatized for at least
20 minutes to controlled ambient temperature and relative humidity conditions. Both factors
mainly affect activity of the sweat gland, but other parameters should equally be considered
with attention to, e.g., anatomical skin site, test products remaining or not on the skin, and
correct handling of the measuring equipment, if any. All these possible influences on
measurement outcome have been discussed in detail in recent guidelines and in pertinent
reviews (5–8).
A CLINICAL EVALUATION: THE REGRESSION METHOD
The dermatologist can perfectly clinically grade a given state of skin dryness (e.g., surface
roughness, squames, and fissures). Clinical evaluation and grading of skin hydration are based
on visual and tactile evaluation of clinical signs. There are numerous possibilities of testing,
but basically these rely on the regression method, published in 1978 by Kligman (9), which is
still used as an industry standard. Briefly, female subjects with moderate to severe xerosis of
the legs are selected following strict criteria. The test products are applied under controlled
conditions by trained employees twice daily five days a week for three weeks. Three days after
the treatment ends, the follow-up period begins. Scoring is also completed three and seven
days later. Treatment period may be shortened to two weeks, if necessary. Following a
published guideline ensures that clinical scoring of the hydration state of the skin surface will
be conducted on the basis of the same definitions (5). Caution is given upon scoring by the
subjects themselves, as their perception of their skin condition may not be the same as that of
the dermatologist’s perception (5,10).
USING BIOENGINEERING MEASUREMENT METHODS
A large number of bioengineering methods are now available to evaluate hydration (or
dryness) of the skin directly or indirectly. Inclusion of these methods in the study protocol
opens many possibilities for getting meaningful results such as design variations, optimization

=== Page 153 ===
of the claim support, and also, most importantly, improvement of cost effectiveness by
shortening the duration of experiment, using a lower number of subjects, and strengthening
the statistical evaluation.
Concerning the numerous techniques available for the evaluation of skin hydration, the
reader is referred to recent monographs describing these methods in a detailed fashion (10–15).
They mainly include measurements of electrical properties, spectroscopic methods such as IR
absorption spectroscopy and emission, evaluation of the barrier function of the stratum
corneum (SC), measurement of mechanical properties, transient thermal transfer, nuclear
magnetic resonance imaging, skin surface topography, and scaling evaluation. Most
frequently, bioengineering techniques based only on the electrical properties of the SC
together with measurement of transepidermal water loss (TEWL) are used. Other methods
remain confined to research laboratories. However, as stated in the introduction, recent
availability of near-IR-based water measurement will now allow to improve hydration
measurements and to better define product efficacy (2,16,17).
Static Measurements
Short-Term Tests/Single Application
The tests are conducted most of the time on the inner side of the forearm of healthy subjects
and allow a randomized side-to-side comparison of test products with a placebo or vehicle, a
known active product, and an untreated control skin. Four to six products may be
simultaneously tested. The products are applied at the rate of 2 mg/cm2. Two different
experimental designs may be used:
1. The test products are left in place for one hour (or another suitable duration, e.g.,
3 hours) (18). Measurements are conducted at different times thereafter. Removal of
excess or non-penetrated product is preferable before measuring, especially if the
preparation contains a high proportion of lipids. Most moisturizers show a rapid
increase of measured hydration values (Fig. 1).
2. The test products may be applied on similar areas at the same rate but under occlusion,
with a standard occluding patch overnight for 16 hours. The next morning,
measurements are conducted in the same way as in part 1 beginning one hour after
removal of the occlusion patch (Fig. 2). This last procedure better picks up the activity of
a humectant contained in the test preparation, whereas the vehicle effect is strongly
attenuated by the uniform conditions encountered under the occlusion patch.
Figure 1
Example of hydration changes over time after one-hour application of two different O/W moisturizers
containing both 2% urea as humectant (measurements conducted with the NOVA DPM 2003; means  ½SD,
~!). &, moisturizer 1; &, moisturizer 2;:, control (untreated skin). Start values (time ¼ 0) measured before
application of the products.
136
Gabard

=== Page 154 ===
Long-Term Tests/Multiple Applications
The design of these tests and selection of subjects is similar to the regression method previously
described but with a modified and shortened regression protocol (19). The treatment period
extends over one week only, and the regression phase takes place over the following week.
Bioengineering measurements are conducted 12 to 16 hours after the treatment or moisturizer
application, and for the last time on the Monday following the regression week. Inclusion of
these noninvasive measurements allowed rapid and reliable product performance evaluation.
Dynamic Measurements
These tests, in addition to the classic evaluation of skin hydration, provide information on
dynamic properties of the SC (20,21). These properties are likely to be modified by the
humectants (e.g., glycerol, urea, a-hydroxy acids) incorporated in the moisturizers used for
treatment. Generally speaking, dynamic function tests are characterized by the assessment of
the skin’s response to a given external stimulus that can be physical (e.g., water, occlusion,
stretch, and heat) or chemical (e.g., drugs and irritants) in nature. These dynamic tests may be
used either during short-term or long-term product testing, and will usually be performed
before and at different time points after treatment.
The Sorption-Desorption Test
This test gives information about the water-binding capacity of the uppermost layers of the SC
(20,21). It is best conducted using measurement devices that are able to measure hydration on a
wet surface and that give instantaneous readings on contact with the skin.
The first value represents the hydration state of the SC. Then 50 mL of distilled water is
pipetted onto the skin, left in place for exactly 10 seconds, and wiped with a soft paper towel.
Then hydration is immediately measured. Further measurements are taken at 0.5, 1, 1.5, and
2 minutes. Parameters such as hygroscopicity, water sorption capacity, water-holding capacity,
and accumulated water decay may be calculated from the measurement curve and used to
characterize the state of the SC and/or different properties of the tested products (Refs. 20 and
21, Fig. 3).
The Moisture Accumulation Test
This test gives information about the quantity of moisture the SC may accumulate during a
given time (20,21). It is conducted with a device that can measure continuously after bringing
the probe in contact with the skin surface. The probe then remains on the skin for three
Figure 2
Example of hydration changes over time after 16-hour application of two different O/W moisturizers
containing both 2% urea as humectant (same products as in Fig. 1; measurements conducted with the NOVA
DPM 2003; means  ½SD, ~ !). &, moisturizer 1; &, moisturizer 2;:, control (untreated skin). Start values
(time ¼ 0) measured before application of the products.
Tests for Skin Hydration
137

=== Page 155 ===
minutes, thereby creating occlusive conditions. The moisture accumulation test (MAT)
measures the accumulation of water under the probe every 0.5 minutes. Water accumulation is
evaluated by calculating the area under the time curve until three minutes (Fig. 4).
The Plastic Occlusion Stress Test
The plastic occlusion stress test (POST) may also be considered a dynamic test. It gives
information about SC hydration, integrity of the barrier function, and SC water-holding
capacity (20,21). It consists of occluding the skin with a plastic chamber (e.g., Hilltop chamber
or a similar occlusive device) for 24 hours. Then the occlusion is removed, and the evaporation
of the accumulated water is measured each minute for 30 minutes as TEWL. The TEWL-
technique has been thoroughly described in recent reviews and guidelines (8,13–15,22,23). The
measurement is called skin surface water loss (SSWL) and not TEWL, because it does not
Figure 3
Time course of hydration changes during a SDT performed 60 minutes after a single one-hour
application of a moisturizer (moisturizer 1 from Figs. 1 and 2; measurements conducted with the NOVA DPM 2003;
means  ½SD, ~). &, moisturizer 1;:, control (untreated skin). Abbreviation: SDT, sorption-desorption test.
Figure 4
Time course of hydration changes during a MAT performed 60 minutes after a single one-hour
application of a moisturizer (moisturizer 1 from Figs. 1 and 2; measurements conducted with the NOVA DPM 2003;
means  ½SD, ~ !). &, moisturizer 1;:, control (untreated skin). Abbreviation: MAT, moisture accumulation test.
138
Gabard

=== Page 156 ===
represent the true TEWL but the sum of the TEWL and the evaporation of water trapped
within and over the SC under the occlusive equipment, at least at the beginning of the
measurement period. The SSWL decay curve appears biexponential. During the first minutes
of evaporation, the SSWL is proportional to SC hydration. At the end of the dehydration time,
SSWL is greatly reduced and mainly TEWL is measured.
Near-IR-Based Spectroscopic Measurements
Methods using near-IR spectroscopy for evaluating the water content of the SC have been used
for several years. They are very sensitive to changes in the water content of the tissue, and they
allow fast determination, thus avoiding occlusive conditions that would change the water
content (2,16,17,24). However, a major inconvenience has been the uncertainty related to the
variations in skin penetration of the different wavelengths in the skin.
This has now been eliminated through the recent introduction of Raman spectroscopy.
For the first time, in vivo measurements of the water content of the SC at different levels of
depth are possible. The applications of this technique are numerous, and the development
potential for skin hydration testing appears huge (2,16,17).
CLINICAL RELEVANCE OF BIOENGINEERING MEASUREMENTS
A recent study, including several research centers but featuring the same experimental
conditions, has investigated the relation between measurements of very dry, dry, and normal
skin using one of the most popular device, the Corneometer CM 825, and clinical grading of
dry skin following stringent criteria (25). Categories that could be defined are shown in Table 1.
This allows for the first time relating in a reasonable manner a clinical score of skin
dryness to a bioengineering measurement.
CONCLUSION
During the evaluation of SC hydration in vivo, it must be kept in mind that no absolute
determination of a water content or concentration is possible if measurement methods other than
the near-IR-based spectrophotometric determination are used. This holds for clinical evaluation
and for bioengineering measurements as well. For this reason, several measurement techniques
should be used simultaneously during a study. Not only is the information gained from these
different experimental approaches complementary and of great benefit if they are integrated in a
clinical evaluation, but one should also remember that moisturizers may influence skin hydration
in different ways. Thus, different aspects of hydration changes need to be investigated, such as
water binding, water retention, or emolliency, which is also a further part of a moisturizer’s action.
Lastly, it should be remembered that, to obtain meaningful results, proper design of the study,
inclusion of a suitable number of subjects, strict standardization of measurement conditions, and
all other relevant factors need to be tightly controlled. Only by assuring the best quality level will
results be obtained that will help to design and use optimal moisturizers.
REFERENCES
1. Kligman A. Introduction. In: Loe´n M, Maibach HI, eds. Dry Skin and Moisturizers. Boca Raton,
London, New York, Washigton DC: CRC Press, 2000:3–9.
2. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Carter EA, et al. In vivo confocal Raman microspectroscopy of the skin:
non-invasive determination of molecular concentration profiles. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 116:434–442.
Table 1
Moisture-Related Skin Types and Corresponding
Corneometer CM 825 Units
Clinical grade
Arbitrary units
(Corneometer CM 825)
Very dry
< 30
Dry
30–40
Normal
> 40
Tests for Skin Hydration
139

=== Page 157 ===
3. COLIPA (The European Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association). Guidelines for the evaluation
of the efficacy of cosmetic products, 2001. COLIPA, B-1160 Auderghem—Brussels. Available at:
http://www.colipa.com/site/index.cfm?SID=15588&OBJ=28455&back=1. Accessed February 2008.
4. Davis JB, McNamara SH. Regulatory aspects of cosmetic claims substantiation. In: Aust LB, ed.
Cosmetic Claims Substantiation. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1998:1–20.
5. Serup J. EEMCO guidance for the assessment of dry skin (xerosis) and ichthyosis: clinical scoring
systems. Skin Res Technol 1995; 1:109–114.
6. Berardesca E. EEMCO guidance for the assessment of stratum corneum hydration: electrical methods.
Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:126–132.
7. Wilhelm KP. Possible pitfalls in hydration measurements. In: Elsner P, Barel AO, Berardesca E, et al.,
eds. Skin Bioengineering: Techniques and Applications in Dermatology and Cosmetology. Current
Problems in Dermatology, Vol. 26. Basel: Karger, 1998:223–234.
8. Gabard B, Treffel P. Transepidermal water loss. In: Agache P, Humbert P, eds. Measuring the Skin.
Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer-Verlag, 2004:553–564.
9. Kligman AM. Regression method for assessing the efficacy of moisturizers. Cosmetics & Toiletries,
1978; 93:27–35.
10. Barel AO, Clarys P, Gabard B. In vivo evaluation of the hydration state of the skin: measurements and
methods for claim support. In: Elsner P, Merk HF, Maibach HI, eds. Cosmetics: Controlled Efficacy
Studies and Regulations. Berlin: Springer, 1999:57–80.
11. Fluhr JW, Gloor M, Lazzerini S, et al. Comparative study of five instruments measuring stratum
corneum hydration (Corneometer CM 820 and CM 825, Skicon 200, Nova DPM 9003, DermaLab).
Part I. In vitro. Skin Res Technol 1999; 5:161–170.
12. Fluhr JW, Gloor M, Lazzerini S, et al. Comparative study of five instruments measuring stratum
corneum hydration (Corneometer CM 820 and CM 825, Skicon 200, Nova DPM 9003, DermaLab).
Part II. In vivo. Skin Res Technol 1999; 5:171–178.
13. Fluhr J, Elsner P, Berardesca E, et al. Bioengineering of the Skin: Water and the Stratum Corneum.
2nd ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2005.
14. Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G. Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton:
Taylor & Francis, 2006.
15. Agache P, Humbert P, eds. Measuring the skin. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer-Verlag, 2004.
16. Chrit L, Bastien P, Socklingum GD, et al. An in vivo randomized study of human skin moisturization
by a new confocal Raman fiber-optic microprobe: assessment of a glycerol-based hydration cream.
Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2006; 19:207–215.
17. River Diagnostics. Non-invasive measurement of water concentration in the skin, Application Note
#001; The use of confocal Raman spectroscopy for the measurement of skin hydration in vivo,
Application Note #002; In vivo assessment of Natural Moisturizer factor content of skin at various
body sites, Application Note #005; Rotterdam, Netherlands. Available at: http://www.riverd.com;
Accessed February 2008.
18. Serup J. A three-hour test for rapid comparison of effects of moisturizers and active constituents
(urea). Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 1992; (suppl 177):29–33.
19. Grove G. Skin surface hydration changes during a mini-regression test as measured in vivo by
electrical conductivity. Curr Therap Res 1992; 52:1–6.
20. Agache P, Black D. Stratum corneum dynamic hydration tests. In: Agache P, Humbert P, eds.
Measuring the Skin. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer-Verlag, 2004:153–164.
21. Primavera G, Berardesca E. Dynamic measurements: the plastic occlusion stress test, moisture
accumulation test, and sorption-desorption test. In: Fluhr J, Elsner P, Berardesca E, Maibach HI, eds.
Bioengineering of the Skin: Water and the Stratum Corneum. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press,
2005:237–245.
22. Pinnagoda J. Hardware and measuring principles: evaporimeter. In: Elsner P, Berardesca E, Maibach
HI, eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Water and the Stratum Corneum. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1994:
51–58.
23. Pinnagoda J, Tupker RA, Agner T, et al. Guidelines for transepidermal water loss measurement: a
report from the standardization group of the European Society of Contact Dermatitis. Contact
Dermatitis 1990; 22:164–168.
24. Bernengo JC, De Rigal J. Physical methods of measuring stratum corneum water content in vivo. In:
Agache P, Humbert P, eds. Measuring the Skin. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer-Verlag,
2004:112–152.
25. Heinrich U, Koop U, Leneveu-Duchemin MC, et al. Multicentre comparison of skin hydration in
terms of physical-, physiloghical- and product-dependent parameters by the capacitive method
(Corneometer CM 825). Int J Cosm Sci 2003; 25:45–53.
140
Gabard

=== Page 158 ===
13
Skin Capacitance Imaging
Emmanuelle Xhauflaire-Uhoda and Ge´rald E. Pie´rard
Department of Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
Recently, a special type of non-optical skin surface imaging was designed under the heading of
skin capacitance imaging (SCI). This method is an application of the silicon image sensor (SIS)
technology, which was primarily developed for recording fingerprints for security reasons (1)].
The sensor is composed of 92160 microcapacitors dispersed on a 18  12.8-mm sensor plate
measuring skin capacitance every 50 mm. These microcapacitors are protected by a thin silicon
oxide layer. SkinChip1 (ST Microelectronics, Geneva and L’Ore´al, Paris, France) is not yet
commercially available. It represents a dedicated device for computer recordings of the skin’s
surface hydration and microrelief (1–3). The device must be closely applied to the skin surface
for five seconds at the most not to interfere with the water flux and content inside the stratum
corneum (SC). SCI images are acquired and displayed in real time on a computer screen where
the capacitance values are transformed into a range of 256 gray levels to form a non-optical
image. On a flat surface, the darker pixels represent high capacitance spots, and the clear ones,
the lower capacitance values. Besides the regular software providing images, other softwares
were developed for routinely characterizing some other specific skin parameters (3). The mean
gray level (MGL) of the image represents the average skin surface hydration. The so-called
corner density (CD) parameter corresponds to the number of crossings between the primary
lines per centimeter square (4). The main orientations of the primary lines of the skin
microrelief can also be assessed.
SKIN SURFACE PATTERNS
SCI scrutinizes the skin surface texture. Indeed, most of the features defining the skin
microrelief (lines, pores, furrows, and wrinkles) appear as whitish objects because their deeper
portions are not in close contact with the measuring probe (1,3,5–7). The gray levels of the skin
surface in close contact with the measuring sensor correspond to the capacitance, i.e., the water
content of the outer SC (Fig. 1). The primary and secondary lines of the microrelief network are
well identified using SCI. In young subjects, the method shows two main, almost perpendic-
ular, orientations of the skin microrelief and their rotation when the skin is stressed. According
to age, CD varies from about 250/cm2 to 400/cm2 on the forearms. The lower lip exhibits a
distinctive SCI map. Fine transversal furrows are present, and a whitish and drier area is
located at the most internal part of the lip (6)] (Fig. 2).
Skin aging is in part characterized by changes in the main orientations of the microrelief
lines (5,6) (Fig. 3). Indeed, the skin of elderly subjects shows microrelief lines mostly oriented
along one single direction. In addition, wrinkles are visible as larger whitish lines.
DERMATOGLYPHICS
“Dermatoglyphics” is a term applied to the configurations of ridged skin. Dermatoglyphics not
only have characteristic patterns, but the ridges are interrupted and branched in a way, which
is unique for any individual. In the human hand, the distal segment of each digit has one of
three configurations, namely a whorl, a loop, or an arch (Fig. 4). The systematic classification of
ridge patterns, as a means of personal identification or for use in studies of inheritance,
requires numerical procedures, such as counting the ridges between specified points or
measuring angles. These aspects are conveniently highlighted using SCI.
Of particular interest, however, is the fact that distortions of the dermatoglyphic patterns
occur in relation to chromosomal aberrations. For example, various alterations have been

=== Page 159 ===
described in Down’s syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome, and Turner’s syndrome. Deficient
ridge formation has also been reported in some dermatoses including Darier disease, alopecia
areata, and psoriasis (8).
SCI is a rapid inkless procedure useful for recording dermatoglyphics. The observed
features may bring an aid to diagnosis in some medical conditions.
Figure 1
SCI at different anatomical sites. (A) Lateral side of the neck with numerous pore openings,
(B) Wrinkles of the face (crowfeet), (C) Inner aspect of the arm with a dense criss-cross network of the microrelief
lines. Abbreviation: SCI, skin capacitance imaging.
Figure 2
SCI of the lower lip: the inner
portion appears drier than the outer part.
Abbreviation: SCI, skin capacitance imaging.
Figure 3
Heterogeneous aspects of the skin of the inner aspect of the
forearm of an elderly men. The microrelief lines are mainly oriented along
one direction, and CD is decreased. Abbreviation: CD, corner density.
142
Xhauflaire-Uhoda and Pie´rard

=== Page 160 ===
SKIN SURFACE HYDRATION
The SCI-derived MGL correlates with the average capacitance values given by the
Corneometer1 (CþK electronic, Cologne, Germany) (1,3). Both methods establish a partial
contact with the skin surface because of its microrelief. The Corneometer1 gives the average
capacitance of the whole contact area with the probe, while SkinChip1 displays a more
detailed distribution histogram of the capacitance values.
Any prolongation over five seconds of the contact time with the SkinChip1 probe may
increase the density in darker pixels owing to accumulation of sweat, transepidermal water
loss (TEWL), and water saturation of the superficial SC. Similarly, SCI aspects are modified by
the application of moisturizers. Images become darker with increased hydration, and
sometimes the texture of the skin can be improved after treatment (Fig. 5).
On chronically photo-exposed skin, SCI presentation usually appears heterogeneous.
Some areas look quite dry in close vicinity with other areas looking unremarkable. Such a
patchy heterogeneity in hydration of the skin surface could be related to focal variations in the
Figure 4
SCI of dermatoglyphics. Abbreviation: SCI, skin
capacitance imaging.
Figure 5
Skin of the neck of a
young adult before (A) and immedi-
ately after (B) application of a mois-
turizer. The moisturizer dramatically
darkens the SCI aspect. Abbreviation:
SCI, skin capacitance imaging.
Skin Capacitance Imaging
143

=== Page 161 ===
epidermal differentiation of photo-exposed skin (Fig. 4). Whether or not these aspects are in
part related to field cancerogenesis is yet unsettled (9,10).
SKIN PORES
“Skin pore” is a dermocosmetic term, which does not encompass one single defined structure.
It is replaced to the best advantage by the acroinfundibulum and the acrosyringium for
distinguishing the openings of the folliculo-sebaceous ducts and the sweat gland apparatus,
respectively (7).
Measurement of the TEWL is often used as a convenient assessment of the SC barrier
function. A number of variables affect TEWL measurements, including person-linked factors
as well as environmental and instrumental variables. Among them, it is acknowledged that
physical, thermal, and emotional sweating need to be controlled. Therefore, a premeasurement
of 15- to 30-minute rest without any physical activity in a temperature-controlled room of 208C
to 228C is taken into consideration in most studies. The same considerations apply to the
electrometric measurements performed under occlusion (11–13), including SCI. In these
different technical approaches, it is impossible to control the so-called imperceptible
perspiration. The contribution of this physiological parameter in the TEWL values has never
been thoroughly evaluated and is neglected in the interpretation of TEWL data.
The clinically imperceptible perspiration is easily observed using SCI. Tiny black dots
mark the active sweat gland openings (Fig. 6). In our experience, this aspect has no effect on
the casual TEWL determinations. When sweating is more active, SCI black dots become larger,
and some merge to form irregular black areas. Because sweat appears as black dots, it is
possible to measure its contribution to the SCI-derived MGL by thresholding the histogram
values. The activity of antiperspirants can be conveniently assessed by this method.
Pilosebaceous openings at the skin surface appear as whitish dots (Fig. 6). The open
comedones and the keratin-filled funnel-like acroinfundibular structures are highlighted
(7,14). These structures are revealed as whitish low capacitance spots. This aspect is in part due
to the absence of contact between the probe and the epithelial lining of each empty
infundibulum, or to the low hydration of the constitutive cornified cells of the microcomedo.
SCI of acne highlights a peculiar heterogeneous patchwork of electrical properties of the
skin. Among the typical whitish pinpoint pattern of normal-looking acroinfundibula,
microcomedones and open comedones appear as larger low-capacitance objects (Fig. 7).
Inflammatory papules appear as targetoid structures centered by a whitish comedo
surrounded by a darker rim. The latter structure reveals a weakened skin barrier function
and the presence of a discrete serosity exsudate (15) (Fig. 7). These electrometric features are
not perceived clinically, but may be important for antiacne drug delivery according to their
hydrophilic or hydrophobic characteristics.
Figure 6
Skin pores. (A) Impercepti-
ble perspiration. Tiny black dots mark
the active sweat gland opening.
(B) Pilosebaceous openings at the
skin surface appear as whitish dots.
144
Xhauflaire-Uhoda and Pie´rard

=== Page 162 ===
SURFACTANT-INDUCED REACTION
The dynamics of SC reactivity to surfactants is quite complex. Surfactants present in hygiene
and skin care products are in part adsorbed at the skin surface, and they also permeate the SC
where they interact with proteins and lipids. A number of physicochemical interactions exist
between corneocytes and surfactants (16). One of the earliest events following surfactant-
induced protein denaturation is perceived as corneocyte swelling (17). This condition leads to a
paradoxical and transient SC hydration, following surfactant challenge in vivo (18). The
structure and physical properties of the SC are further altered following prolonged contact
with anionic surfactants (17,19,20). As a result, minimal to severe irritation usually develop.
Full-blown lesions show erythema, increased TEWL, altered cutaneous microrelief, increased
skin surface roughness, and impaired desquamation. The SC water content can be assessed
in vivo using devices measuring changes in electrical properties of skin at different frequencies
and at different depths inside the SC (12,21,22). SCI has an added value to the conventional
assessment methods because its sensitivity discloses focal and minute changes that are blurred
by the methods averaging data on a relatively large area corresponding to the size of the sensor
probe.
Two discrete effects of mild surfactants on human SC were assessed using SCI. The
short-term patch-testing procedure (23) and the open method close to the in-use conditions
were used (24). Both experimental procedures disclosed the early step of corneocyte swelling
induced by surfactants. Delayed assessments after a couple of hours as well as repeated
surfactant insults were responsible for a second event corresponding to a skin surface–drying
effect. The earliest change in the irritation zone was revealed by darker pixels, corresponding
to water-enriched corneocytes in contact with the probe. This aspect probably resulted from
the transient intracellular accumulation of unbound water. In a second step, this hydration
state was replaced by the opposite dehydrated condition pictured as white pixels (Fig. 8). As a
result, SCI reveals the surfactant-induced irritation kinetic with high sensitivity. A correlation
was also found between SCI and data gained by the corneosurfametry bioassay (24).
HYPERKERATOTIC DERMATOSES
Hyperkeratosis is a typical feature of pityriasis (tinea) versicolor corresponding to a Malassezia
spp infection. The condition is conveniently highlighted using SCI because the skin surface is
dryer than the surrounding skin. The method allows to detect small lesions of pityriasis (tinea)
versicolor almost invisible to the naked eye (Fig. 9). Interestingly enough, lesional skin appears
anhidrotic, perhaps due to the occlusion of each acrosyringium (25).
Psoriasis is the paradigm of inflammatory hyperkeratotic dermatoses. SCI reveals a
patchwork of different electrical properties on lesional skin (26). Whitish low capacitance is
typical for stable hyperkeratotic plaques. More inflammatory and evolving plaques show
Figure 7
SCI of acne. The larger white spots (low capacitance)
correspond to comedones, and inflammatory papules are identified as
targoid structures centered by a whitish comedo surrounded by a well-
circumscribed darker rim. Abbreviation: SCI, skin capacitance imaging.
Skin Capacitance Imaging
145

=== Page 163 ===
darker high-capacitance spots (Fig. 10). This aspect is likely related to sites exhibiting increased
TEWL (27). SCI can thus provide clues of disease activity in the plaque stage of psoriasis and
can be used to monitor therapy.
KERATOTIC OR PIGMENTED TUMORS
Viral warts are easily identified using SCI. They exhibit a dry hyperkeratotic aspect of their
surface (25,28,29). No difference in capacitance reduction was found between different types of
warts (Fig. 11).
Melanocytic nevi and pigmented seborrheic keratoses may be difficult to distinguish
during the clinical inspection. SCI shows variable aspects irrespective of the nature of these
lesions. Low capacitance is commonly yielded, but increased capacitance is also possible,
particularly on minimally inflammed lesions (30). Inflammation in the superficial dermis
produces edema and discrete transudate through the epidermis. Such a water flux ultimately
steeps the SC. Inflamed lesions of seborrheic keratoses and melanocytic nevi exhibit a
capacitance map, which is not uniform. Spotty areas of decreased capacitance are dispersed in
a buckshot pattern over the background. The lesions are commonly rimmed by a thin border of
lower capacitance (Fig. 12). This situation was also observed in inflammatory lesions of acne
and acute psoriasis (Figs. 7 and 10).
Figure 8
Corneocyte reactivity to
anionic surfactant. (A) Skin surface
imaging of the partial overlap between
two successive patch tests performed
with a diluted anionic surfactant.
(B) Skin area examined two days
after the condition depicted in (A). The
overlap region shows a white appear-
ance, indicating a decreased water
content in corneocytes. Source: From
Ref. 23.
Figure 9
SCI of small lesions of pityriasis (tinea) versicolor. The aspect
in bunch characteristic of this kind of lesion is well highlighted. The lesion
appears anhidrotic. Abbreviation: SCI, skin capacitance imaging.
146
Xhauflaire-Uhoda and Pie´rard

=== Page 164 ===
HAIR SHAFT MOISTURIZATION
Similar to the SC, the cuticle of hair shafts can show variations in hydration. The kinetics of
water sorption and desorption is possibly altered following some hair weathering and damage.
It is also influenced by the application of some hair care products. SCI determinations can be
used for assessing these modifications in hair shaft moisture.
Figure 10
SCI of a psoriatic lesion, combining white hyperkeratotic
areas and darker inflammatory sites. Abbreviation: SCI, skin capacitance
imaging.
Figure 11
SCI of plantar warts. Abbreviation: SCI, skin capacitance
imaging.
Figure 12
SCI of keratotic pigmented
tumors. (A) Small lesions of seborrheic
keratosis with white low-capacitance
dots corresponding to horny plugs.
(B) Moderately inflamed melanocytic
naevus. Abbreviation: SCI, skin capac-
itance imaging. Source: From Ref. 29.
Skin Capacitance Imaging
147

=== Page 165 ===
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, SCI provides non-optical pictures showing aspects invisible to the naked eye. It
represents a procedure allowing both visualization and quantification of the skin microrelief,
SC and hair shaft hydration, acneiform follicular cornification, imperceptible perspiration, and
active sweating. The method brings unique and sound information in dermocosmetology, also
giving insights in the physiopathology of skin disorders.
REFERENCES
1. Le´veˆque JL, Querleux B. SkinChip1, a new tool for investigating the skin surface in vivo. Skin Res
Technol 2003; 9:343–347.
2. Pie´rard GE, Le´veˆque JL. What is SkinChip1? From silicon image sensor technology to SkinChip1.
Dermatology 2004; 208:291–292.
3. Batisse D, Giron F, Le´veˆque JL. Capacitance imaging of the skin surface. Skin Res Technol 2006;
12(2):99–104.
4. Berardesca E, Primavera G, Zahouani H, et al. Capacitance imaging: new parameters for
characterizing the skin surface texture, effect of hydration. Skin Res Technol 2005; 11:293.
5. Pie´rard GE, Uhoda I, Pie´rard-Franchimont C. From skin microrelief to wrinkles: an area ripe for
investigations. J Cosmet Dermatol 2003; 2:21–28.
6. Le´veˆque JL, Goubanova E. Influence of age on lips and the perioral skin. Dermatology 2004; 208:
309–313.
7. Uhoda E, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Petit L, et al. The conundrum of skin pores in dermocosmetology.
Dermatology 2005; 210:3–7.
8. Schaumann B, Alter M. Dermatoglyphics in Medical Disorders. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1976:
1–258.
9. Braakhuis BJ, Tabor MP, Kummer JA, et al. A genetic explanation of Slaughter’s concept of field
cancerization: evidence and clinical implications. Cancer Res 2003; 63:1727–1730.
10. Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE, et al. Hairlessness scalp weathering. A study
using skin capacitance imaging and ultraviolet light-enchanced visualisation. Clin Exp Dermatol
(in press).
11. Paquet F, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Fumal I, et al. Sensitive skin at menopause dew point and
electrometric properties of the stratum corneum. Maturitas 1998; 28:221–227.
12. Goffin V, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. Passive sustainable hydration of the stratum corneum
following surfactant challenge. Clin Exp Dermatol 1999; 24:308–311.
13. Van Cromphaut I, Fumal I, Jacquemin D, et al. Skin barrier repair after burns. Electrometric
evaluation using the passive sustainable hydration test. J Env Med 1999; 1:47–50.
14. Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Hermanns JF, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Highlighting the rim of perifollicular
epidermal unit. Eur J Dermatol 2006; 16(3):225–229.
15. Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Pie´rard GE. Skin capacitance imaging of acne lesions. Skin Res Technol 2007;
13:9–12.
16. Zhai H, Fautz R, Fuchs A, et al. Assessment of the subclinical irritation of surfactants: a screening
open assay model. Exog Dermatol 2002; 1:238–241.
17. Rhein ID, Robbins CR, Ferne K, et al. Surfactant structure effects on swelling of isolated human
stratum corneum. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1986; 37:125–139.
18. Willhelm KP, Cua AB, Wolff HH, et al. Surfactant-induced stratum corneum hydration in vivo:
prediction of the irritation potential of anionic surfactants. J Invest Dermatol 1993; 101:310–315.
19. Goffin V, Paye M, Pie´rard GE. Comparison of in vitro predictive tests for irritation induced by anionic
surfactants. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 3:38–41.
20. Uhoda E, Paye M, Pie´rard GE. Comparative clinical electrometric assessments of the impact of
surfactants on forearm skin. Exog Dermatol 2003; 2:64–69.
21. Berardesca E. EEMCO guidance for the assessment of stratum corneum hydration: electrical methods.
Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:126–132.
22. Fluhr JW, Gloor V. Comparative study of five instruments measuring stratum corneum hydration.
Skin Res Technol 1999; 5:171–178.
23. Uhoda E, Le´veˆque JL, Pie´rard GE. Silicon image sensor technology for in vivo detection of surfactant-
induced corneocytes swelling and drying. Dermatology 2005; 210:184–188.
24. Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Loussouarn G, Haubrechts C, et al. Skin capacitance imaging and corneosurfa-
metry. A comparative assessment of the impact of surfactants on stratum corneum. Contact
Dermatitis 2006; 54:249–253.
148
Xhauflaire-Uhoda and Pie´rard

=== Page 166 ===
25. Uhoda E, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. Pityriasis versicolor anhidrotique. Dermatol Actual
2005; 89:16–17.
26. Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. Skin capacitance mapping of psoriasis. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol 2006; 20:1261–1265.
27. Goon ATJ, Yosipovitch G, Chan YH, et al. Barrier repair in chronic plaque-type psoriasis. Skin Res
Technol 2004; 10:10–13.
28. Pie´rard GE. Skin capacitance imaging for the dermatologist. Eur J Dermatol Rev 2006; 1:62–63.
29. Le´veˆque JL, Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Pie´rard GE. Skin capacitance imaging, a new technique for
investigating skin surface properties. Eur J Dermatol 2006; 16:500–506.
30. Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Pie´rard GE. Contrasted skin capacitance imaging of seborrheic keratoses and
melanocytic naevi. Dermatology 2006; 212:394–397.
Skin Capacitance Imaging
149

=== Page 168 ===
14
Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for In Vivo
Skin Hydration Measurement
Andre´ van der Pol and Peter J. Caspers
River Diagnostics BV, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
INTRODUCTION
Confocal Raman microspectroscopy of skin in vivo is nowadays routinely being applied in
human panelist studies. Ever since the first Raman spectra of skin were presented, it is known
that these spectra contain unique information on the chemical composition of the skin. The
ability to measure the chemical composition of living biological tissues nondestructively is a
valuable tool in the skin sciences. Raman spectroscopy has qualities that make it unusually
attractive for such measurements. Especially the ability to measure the chemical composition
of tissues noninvasively at defined depths, using confocal optics (optical sectioning), is unique.
Because of the complexity of biological tissues, Raman spectroscopy has only in the last decade
begun to make significant contributions in skin science. A very recent review discusses the in
vivo applications of Raman spectroscopy in the measurement of the composition of skin,
including topically applied compounds and their effects on skin composition, in the context of
pharmaceutical applications (such as transdermal drug delivery) (1).
Skin research increasingly depends on more detailed knowledge of the molecular
composition of skin and the spatial distribution of skin constituents. On a microscopic scale
(the scale of the confocal Raman measurement), the skin is highly heterogeneous. Its molecular
composition and structure vary tremendously over different body sites and at different depths
below the surface of the skin. In the stratum corneum (SC) especially, concentration gradients
(e.g., water gradients, pH gradients, diffusion kinetics) play a role in biochemical or skin
physiological processes. The composition of the skin is also affected by skin disorders,
environmental factors such as sun exposure, seasonal variation, diets, and bathing habits, and
cosmetic or medical treatments. Skin treatments may also bring about changes in dimension,
such as an increase in SC thickness due to swelling. The spatially complex skin tissue can be
excellently studied using Raman spectroscopy with a confocal approach, where spatial
resolution can be achieved that is consistent with the size of many features of interest (*5 mm
in depth and *1 mm horizontally).
Noninvasive methods are particularly welcome. This is partly because they cause less
discomfort for the patient or volunteer subject, but also because noninvasive methods enable
investigation of the skin in its natural state without affecting its integrity, morphology, or
molecular composition. Noninvasive measurements can be performed repeatedly on the same
skin area in vivo and can thus be used to monitor time-dependent changes in the skin brought
about by skin treatments.
Caspers et al. presented the first in vivo confocal Raman spectra of human skin (2) and
were able to clearly show compositional differences at different depths below the skin surface.
For example, large changes in composition were observed near the SC–stratum granulosum
interface, from which the SC thickness could be derived in vivo. This was confirmed shortly
after by combined confocal microscopy and Raman spectroscopy (3), (see discussion below).
Whereas the aforementioned, more general review, discusses the measurement of the main
chemical composition of the SC (1), this chapter focuses on how measurements of water
concentration gradients can be used to study the moisturization process of the skin in its outer layer.
ALTERNATIVE METHODS TO MEASURE SKIN HYDRATION
It has been known for centuries that humans continuously lose water through the skin, for
instance, from experiments in which human subjects and their ingested and excreted liquids
are carefully weighted. The detailed hydration process of the skin and the dynamic transport

=== Page 169 ===
of water through the skin have been subject to investigations for decades. Modern methods for
studying the moisturization of the skin can be coarsely classified, using the following criteria:
1.
the relationship of the measured parameters to the hydration state of the skin (direct
or indirect, straightforward, or complex);
2.
spatial resolution, parallel and perpendicular to the skin surface;
3.
the extent to which the measurement influences the skin state (invasiveness and the
ability to resample the probed site); and
4.
the ease of use (both the measurement procedure and the data processing and
interpretation).
It is beyond the purpose of this chapter to discuss the features of the various methods in
use. However, a short and simplified classification, using the aforementioned criteria, along
with the newest method of confocal Raman spectroscopy, will help clarifying the quite
remarkable position of the latter. The methods included in the comparison are Karl Fischer
titration, light microscopy, electron microscopy, electrical methods (capacitance and conduc-
tance), transepidermal water loss (TEWL), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), near infrared
spectroscopy (NIRS), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy using attenuated total reflection
sampling (ATR-FTIR), opto-thermal transient emission radiometry (OTTER), and of course
Raman spectroscopy. In Table 1, these methods are ranked according to their favorability
toward the four criteria (from  to þþ). The table also contains a short comment. In the right
column, some key reference papers are suggested for further reading. The selection of key
references is a personal selection by the authors. It will provide the reader with more details,
helpful in gaining a better understanding of the different ways in which skin hydration may be
measured. The authors by no means claim the selection to be complete or to effectively
represent the whole field of science.
Since the hydration of the skin is so closely related to water gradients that reside within
the very thin SC, confocal Raman seems unusually suitable, especially when one takes its in
vivo applicability into account. Despite its apparent complexity, of which we believe may be
mainly due to relative unawareness of Raman spectroscopic technologies, the measurement
routine is not difficult to master. It is the experience of the authors that an instrument operator
(with no prior knowledge of spectroscopy) can be trained in one to two days, enabling him to
carry out the in vivo measurements of water depth concentration profiles on human
volunteers.
A method that appears to potentially possess comparable features as confocal Raman
microspectroscopy is MRI. An impressive spatial resolution of 4 mm (in all directions) has
already been demonstrated on very small (single biological cell) isolated samples (22).
However, the extremely difficult challenges to overcome for large samples, such as human
volunteers, will be the size and stability of the magnet and foremost the definition and stability
of the magnetic field gradient. Whereas the Raman methodology already allows for
measurement of the overall chemical composition (1), this is not yet possible for in vivo
MRI of large samples. Finally, the cost of ownership of MRI equipment can become very high.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IN VIVO RAMAN METHODOLOGY
Qualitative Description of the Raman Effect
In Raman spectroscopy, a sample of interest (this can be gaseous, liquid, or solid) is
illuminated by a laser beam. The light in the laser beam is of single (or very narrow)
wavelength nature. The electric component of the electromagnetic fields within the laser beam
drives the electronic cloud of the molecules present in the sample. The driven (and oscillating)
electronic clouds reemit most of the collided laser light without energy loss (by the physical
laws of induction, an oscillating electronic charge emits electromagnetic radiation at the
oscillating frequency); the only difference may be the direction in which the photons are
ejected out of the molecules. This process is referred to as elastic scattering (or Rayleigh
scattering). A very small amount of the laser light, however, scatters inelastically; the ejected
photons have a different energy than the injected laser photons. The difference in energy is
taken up or released by the molecules and is used to promote or demote, respectively, the
152
van der Pol and Caspers

=== Page 170 ===
Table 1
Brief Comparison of Some Features of Current Methods to Assess Skin Hydration
Method
Water direct/indirect
Spatial resolution
Invasiveness
Ease of use
Key references
Karl-Fisher
þþ



(4)
Direct and absolute
Destructive
Long preparation
Light microscopy
þ
þ


(5,6)
Swelling can be observed
0.5 mm
Sections required
Long preparation
Electron microscopy
þ
þþ


(7–9)
(SEM and STEM)
Indirect
<0.01 mm
Cryo-sections
Long prep, complex
instrument
Capacitance and
impedance

Influenced by products

Probes top 30 mm
þ
Contact probe
þþ
Push button
(10–12)
Conductance


þ
þþ
(13–15)
Influenced by products
Probes top 1–10 mm
Contact probe
Push button
TEWL
þ

þ
þþ
(16,17)
Measures flux
cm
Contact probe
Push button
MRI
þþ

þþ

(18)
Direct
70 mm in vivo
Complex instrument
NIR
þ

þþ
þ
(19)
Difficult to quantify
Probes top 1–2 mm
Noncontact
Moderate complex
ATR-FTIR
þ
þ/
þ
þ
(20)
Difficult to quantify
Probes top 1–2 mm
Contact probe
Moderate complex
OTTER
þ
þ
þþ
þ/
(21)
Direct, but theoretical modeling required
> 10 mm
Noncontact
Complex instrument
Confocal Raman
þþ
þ
þ
þ
This paper
Direct, quantitative relative to keratin
1 mm lateral, 5 mm depth
Contact probe
Moderate complex
Abbreviations: SEM, scanning electron microscopy; STEM, scanning transmission electron microscopy; TEWL, transepidermal water loss; NIR, near infrared; ATR-FTIR, attenuated
total reflection sampling–Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy; OTTER, opto-thermal transient emission radiometry.
Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for In Vivo Skin Hydration Measurement
153

=== Page 171 ===
vibrational energy levels of the molecules. The mechanism of interaction, leading to the energy
difference, involves a modulation of the electromagnetic field, because of oscillating electronic
cloud, by the much smaller electromagnetic field generated by the ever-vibrating nuclei
present in the molecules. By measurement of the intensity and energy of the reemitted light of
different frequencies than the laser frequency, a Raman spectrum is obtained. The differences
in energy correspond to transitions in vibrational energy levels. In this respect, a Raman
spectrum contains the same kind of information as an infrared spectrum, but the way by which
this is obtained (photon scattering) is different from IR spectroscopy (photon absorption).
In Vivo Raman Methodology
In vivo, Raman spectra are obtained by focusing a laser beam through a microscope and
allowing the microscope objective to project the focused laser beam on and below the surface
of the skin. Subsequently, the Raman light is measured in the backscattered direction through
the same microscope objective. Numerous technical challenges have to be overcome before
Raman measurements on biological tissues can be fast enough for practical use in in vivo
clinical studies. General purpose Raman instruments, available in most well-equipped
analytical laboratories, are not capable of practically useful measurements on skin. Recently,
however, Raman instrumentation has been developed, employing advanced technologies, and
made commercially available, which is capable of practical use in these demanding
applications. Figure 1 shows a photo of this first commercially available Raman skin analyzer.
Most critical factors in an optimized Raman skin analyzer are selection of lasers, choice of
optical materials, detector quality, opto-mechanical stability, and for practical utility, software
that is easy to use and can effectively handle the large volumes of data that are generated in in
vivo panel studies. Laser safety considerations also create limiting technical requirements that
must be met, thereby strongly influencing the overall engineering of a Raman skin analyzer.
Indeed, a capable Raman skin analyzer may be thought of as being composed of four
components, each of which must meet critical requirements: (i) a laser light source and
associated light conditioning optics, (ii) an NIR (the optimal wavelength applied in the
measurement of skin) optimized microscopic measurement stage, (iii) the Raman spectrom-
eter, and (iv) specialized operating and data analysis software. Each component, as well as the
implications of laser safety, will now be briefly discussed below.
Laser Excitation Source and Optics
Firstly, the laser(s) used must emit light at wavelengths at which no photo(bio)chemical
reactions are brought about and at which minimal fluorescence is stimulated in the skin. This
places a lower limit on the usable laser wavelength at approximately 660 nm. Secondly, the
Raman-scattered photons must be detected with the highest possible efficiency and the lowest
possible noise. State-of-the-art technology for this purpose is a charge coupled device (CCD)
detector for which the detection is limited to wavelengths shorter than about 1100 nm.
Detection of a Raman spectrum in the so-called fingerprint spectral region (400–2000 cm1)
therefore sets an upper limit to the laser excitation wavelength of about 900 nm.
Figure 1
The river diagnostics model 3510
skin composition analyzer is the first Raman
instrument optimized for in vivo analysis of skin.
154
van der Pol and Caspers

=== Page 172 ===
Thus, the choice of laser wavelengths is restricted to a “biological and technical window”
in the NIR, approximately in the range of 660 to 850 nm. Typically, solid-state diode lasers are
applied. For diffraction limited laser focusing (required for the best spatial resolution), a single
mode laser is required. The laser must be stable in power output and wavelength, and its
emission line must be narrow to allow for achievement of high spectral resolution. Unwanted
laser diode background radiation or satellite emissions must be removed (filtered) before the
laser light is injected into the microscope. The laser power out of the measurement device (the
microscope) must meet the requirements derived from the laser safety limitations (see below
the subsection “Laser Safety Considerations”). Finally, a strict requirement is set on all optical
materials in the laser light path; only minimal fluorescence or other background contributions
are allowed.
Microscope Measurement Stage
The Raman signal is collected back through the microscope objective, and the microscope must
have uncompromised confocal optics. The entire optical train must very efficiently transmit the
signal to the spectrometer and finally to the detector. The spatial resolution of the microscope
must be better than the thickness of the SC, otherwise no information about the distribution of
materials (such as water) within this skin layer is to be obtained. The best microscope objective
to this end must be custom designed and optimized for the NIR wavelengths (660–950 nm).
Also critical is the absence of any difference in refractive index in the optical path from the
objective to the skin. In the skin analyzer (Fig. 1), this is managed by positioning the
microscope objective below a measurement window of identical refractive index as the skin
and the objective. The space between the objective and the measurement window is filled with
a refractive index matching immersion oil. The sampled skin rests and is locally conveniently
fixed on the measurement window. If, on the other hand, a large difference in refractive index
is present between the microscope objective and the skin (e.g., by focusing through air), a
severe degradation of depth resolution results. The microscope objective must be movable in
the axial direction (z axis) under precise control. This allows spectra to be recorded at
successive depths in the skin, from which composition-depth profiles are obtained. The
microscope stage must allow for convenient orientation of human subjects. Usually an inverted
configuration is used. The most common measurement site at present is the volar aspect of the
forearm, (Fig. 1).
Raman Spectrometer
A very high laser wavelength rejection and again a high transmission at optical interfaces (low
reflection and scattering losses) are required to preserve as many of the information-bearing
photons as possible. Of course, the detector must also be of high performance. Any general
purpose Raman spectrometer would benefit from these requirements, but in the measurement
of biological samples, the information sought is often in small spectral differences. Therefore,
the spectra must be of very high quality. Furthermore, these high-quality spectra must be
routinely obtainable in a time scale compatible with panel studies and the patience of
volunteer panelists. Hence, maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) by employment of an
optimized spectrometer design is of great importance. In a clinical research environment, data
recorded today must compare meaningfully to data recorded before or after. Therefore,
mechanical and optical stability and measurement repeatability are further important
considerations. In clinical environments, where more than one spectrometer is in use, it is
further required that results obtained on one skin analyzer will be directly and reliably
comparable with results obtained on another skin analyzer. This places very high demands on
the accuracy and reproducibility of instrument calibration and correction for instrument
response effects.
Software
Data acquisition software for in vivo Raman measurements must have specialized features to
handle the often large number of measurements in typical panel studies and to satisfy
requirements that are not normally encountered in other types of Raman analysis. For
example, the software must enable the operator to quickly select locations of interest on the
skin surface. Also, since depth information (usually changes in composition as a function of
Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for In Vivo Skin Hydration Measurement
155

=== Page 173 ===
depth) is important, the software must incorporate a reliable and accurate means of locating
the skin surface for reference. Further, the software must have minimal data acquisition “dead
time” between sequential spectrum acquisitions, to maximize throughput, when thousands of
spectra are typically acquired in a day. Because of the many experimental variables in a typical
skin study design, the number of spectra to handle can become very large. Therefore, the data-
processing software must incorporate special features. In conventional spectroscopic
processing software, spectra can be manipulated and analyzed typically one by one or batch
by batch. For the larger numbers of spectra, typical for in vivo studies, the time, simply to read
in each single spectrum and export the result after analysis, can become prohibitive. Even in a
batch-processing mode, the time to sort, select, and read in the spectra to define the batches for
analysis can become a bottleneck. Therefore, the software must feature ways to enter the
experimental design and use this to select and process the spectra accordingly.
Laser Safety Considerations
The International Laser Safety Standard, IEC 60825-1 (2001), prescribes maximum permissible
exposure (MPE) limits for the skin, which are dependent on the wavelength of the laser light
and the duration of the exposure. The MPEs for skin are formal limits based on extrapolations
of exposure to sunlight and do not represent actual damage thresholds, which may be
considerably higher. To provide a “flavor” for MPE magnitude, the configuration of the
instrument (Fig. 1) results in an MPE limit of 30 mW for 785-nm laser excitation, and 20 mW for
671-nm excitation. These values are not to be taken in general for the wavelengths cited, but
must be determined for any instrument design intended for in vivo skin analysis.
There must not be any significant risk of eye damage from exposure to the laser beam,
while the measurement window is not covered by the skin to be measured. Practically
speaking, laser exposure of the eye is not a difficult risk to manage in a properly designed
instrument since the laser beam diverges at a high angle when emerging from the microscope
objective, but the risk must nevertheless be properly managed. The instrument (Fig. 1) operates
well within the limits of a class 2M laser device, which means that the instrument is eye safe.
Incidental direct observation of the beam is not an eye hazard, provided that no optical
instruments are used to observe the beam. Each instrument is tested for compliance with the
class 2M laser device classification.
When these five elements, an appropriate laser light source, microscopic measurement
stage, NIR-optimized Raman spectrometer, specialized software, and in vivo laser safety
provisions, are combined in a Raman instrument, valuable information hitherto unavailable to
researchers becomes accessible.
RAMAN METHODS FOR THE STUDY OF HYDRATION OF THE SKIN
Relationship Between the Raman Spectrum of Skin and the Local Water Concentration
In the Raman method for measurement of hydration of the skin, a signal is isolated from the
Raman spectrum, which is mainly because of the water present in the skin. Note that the signal
itself also depends on the depth from which the signal originates; signals that are recorded at
greater depths will be weaker. This effect is easily understood, since the skin is not infinitely
transparent for the laser and Raman light, it exhibits rather a bit turbid character. In Raman
spectroscopy in general, this effect is usually compensated by dividing the measured intensity
of the signal by the intensity of a reference signal that may be selected. Requirements for a
good reference signal are that firstly it must be due to a substance that is present more or less
homogeneously in the sample measured, and secondly, its Raman signal must be sufficiently
strong. Since the reference signal is attenuated by exactly the same factor as the analyte signal
(e.g., water), the division will cancel out the depth-dependent attenuation. In biological
samples, often a signal due to a protein is used. The Mendelsohn group, for example, uses a
signal due to phenylalanine to this end (23); others use the overall signal of keratin, which
represents the major dry mass fraction in the SC (24).
In 2000, Caspers et al. published the first in vivo water concentration measurements in
skin as a function of depth below the skin surface (24). In this paper, the method to calculate a
water concentration in mass percentages of wet tissue is discussed in detail. It also involves
internal normalization of the water signal, in this case by a signal due to keratin. In Figure 2, a
156
van der Pol and Caspers

=== Page 174 ===
part of a typical Raman spectrum of untreated SC skin is shown. In the Figure 2, the signals
due to keratin and water are indicated. Furthermore, integration boundaries for the signals due
to water and keratin are drawn after spectral baseline subtraction. From Raman spectral
measurement of solutions of protein of known concentration, Caspers was able to set up a
calibration, equating the ratio of Raman signal intensities due to water (W) and keratin (K) to
the mass percentage of water present in the skin (for wet tissue) (24):
waterðmass%Þ ¼
W=K
ðW=KÞ þ R  100%
ð1Þ
Where R is a calibration constant derived from the measurements of the protein solutions.
In Figure 3, typical water depth concentration profiles recorded within a 2  2 cm2 area
on the ventral forearm are shown.
As can be verified from Figure 3, the four repeat measurements do not coincide. This is
caused by the biological inhomogeneity of the skin. This implies that for accurate water
contents, repeat measurements and averaging must be carried out. In the Figure 3, the
approximate SC–epidermis boundary is indicated. At this boundary, the water concentration
gradient changes its slope. This feature is further discussed below.
Figure 2
High wave number part of the spectral baseline corrected in vivo Raman spectrum of SC on the thenar.
Indicated are integration boundaries for signals due to keratin and water.
Figure 3
Measured water concentration versus depth, from confocal
Raman measurements, at four locations within a small area (2  2 cm2)
on the volar aspect of the forearm. The line indicates the approximate
SC–epidermis interface.
Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for In Vivo Skin Hydration Measurement
157

=== Page 175 ===
The time to record a single water depth concentration profile over about 30 mm of skin on
the volar forearm (covering the SC and the upper part of the epidermis) is about 15 seconds.
In 2005, L’Ore´al researchers presented in vivo results on human volar forearm skin,
using an in-house built confocal Raman setup (25). The work discusses depth concentration
profiles from water and other components, but for the present purpose, only the water results
are highlighted. In their analysis of the Raman spectra, only a ratio between the intensities of
signals due to water and a reference signal was used. The ratio chosen was taken from an older
paper, on confocal Raman spectroscopy of cornea (26). No quantification of the water contents
was carried out.
Validation of the Quantitative In Vivo Water Concentration Measurement
To the best of our knowledge, no independent method to quantify in vivo depth-dependent
water concentration in skin exists. Therefore, validation against a “golden standard” is not
possible. However, there are possibilities for comparison with in vitro methods. If we compare
the water depth concentration profiles as proposed by Warner et al. in 1988 (7) to the results
(Fig. 3), the agreement is striking. The two methods are completely independent. Warner et al.
obtained their quantitative estimate from an area analysis of scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) images of thin cryosections of skin, taking into account the densities of
keratin and ice. Caspers’ method, on the other hand, is based on the Raman spectra of
prepared solutions of proteins (24). Both methods result in a concentration in the 20% to 30%
range for the outer surface (the upper layer of the SC), increasing to about 70% at the interface
with the epidermis (note: the 70% concentration in Warner’s method was an assumption and
not a result of his method).
Very recently, Wu and Polefka presented direct validation results for extracted pigskin SC
(27). Samples were equilibrated at different relative humidities and subsequently cut in half. For
one half set, the absolute water concentration in the SC was determined with Karl Fischer’s
titration method. The other half set was analyzed according to the Raman method of Caspers
(24). This approach allowed for a direct correlation of water concentrations from independent
analysis methods. The correlation proved remarkably good, an R2 of 0.989 was found. It was
further noted that the precision of the Raman method for water concentrations above 30% was
better than for the Karl Fischer method. In their paper, Wu and Polefka also reported correlations
of conductance measurements with the Raman measurements. The same paper also covered
moisturization efficacy results on pigskin SC (see the “Applications” section).
Water Concentration Gradients and Measurement of the Stratum Corneum Thickness
Knowledge of the thickness of the SC is essential in understanding the efficacies of products.
Obviously, moisturization of the SC means adding water, and adding water implies adding
volume. It is therefore expected that the SC will swell. The changing dimension of the SC
under the action of any treatment has consequences for the calculation of efficacies; this applies
to not only the degree of moisturization but also, for example, to the content of a constituent of
interest before and after application.
Before confocal Raman spectroscopy became available, the shape of the water
concentration gradient and its change upon treatment was already known from in vitro
experiments or theoretical calculations.
STEM of biopsied and rapidly frozen human epidermis has already been applied for
more then 20 years to study the water concentration gradient; see, for example, the work by
Warner et al. from 1988 (7). These results showed that a water concentration gradient must
reside in the SC.
In 1984, experimental dynamic water flux measurements of in vitro SC as a function of its
water content enabled the calculation of water concentration gradients that must exist in the in
vitro SC samples (28). These calculations were based on Fick’s law of diffusion. All profiles
were found to be steep and linear in the SC, and the model accurately described the swelling of
the SC as a function of the water content and also as a function of the surface water content.
In 1997, Norle´n et al. (6) applied light microscopy and confocal laser-scanning
microscopy (CLSM) to study the swelling of extracted pieces of human SC. They found that
after incubation of dried SC in distilled water for 90 minutes, the observed swellings were
26.3  16% in the thickness dimension and only 4.1  1.4% in the lateral dimension. Thus,
swelling after addition of water to the SC mainly takes place in the thickness direction.
158
van der Pol and Caspers

=== Page 176 ===
In Caspers’ original paper (24), he pointed out that the shape of the water profiles could
be linked to the SC thicknesses. At different body sites, the water concentration profiles
changed slopes at different depths. Caspers confirmed the results in 2001 and pointed out that
the observed steep increase in water concentration at a particular depth below the surface of
the skin indicates the SC–epidermis interface (29). The general appearance of the in vivo water
concentration profiles are in agreement with in vitro water concentration profiles as
determined by X-ray microanalysis (7). The SC thicknesses on the thenar and forearm are
approximately 110 and 15 mm, respectively. Further and conclusive confirmation of the fact
that the steep increase in water concentration occurs at the boundary between SC and living
epidermis was presented in 2003 by Caspers et al. (3). Boundaries, as determined by confocal
video microscopy, corresponded precisely to the boundaries as derived from the water
concentration profiles.
Recently, a number of groups published estimations of the SC thickness, on the basis of
confocal Raman measurements and their corresponding water depth concentration profiles.
Sieg et al. studied water depth concentration profiles for forearm skin (30). They propose to
model the profiles with a sigmoid-like function (Weibull function). One of the fit parameters is
the location of the steepest gradient; this is indicative of the SC thickness (it is not the thickness
itself). Their work is further discussed in the “Applications” section.
In their study of the delivery of retinol to the viable epidermis, by confocal Raman
microspectroscopy, Pudney et al. calculated the approximate location of the SC–epidermis
boundary from water concentration profiles and from concentration profiles of the
components of the natural moisturizing factor (NMF) recorded at the same location (31). By
selecting a depth at which 30% of the maximum content of NMF is found and a second depth
at which the water concentration is 55% by mass, two closely spaced locations of the interface
are obtained. Subsequently, these two estimators are averaged. Although the criteria for depth
selection may be arbitrary, their approach allowed for a systematic estimation of the location of
the boundary for every individual measurement spot. This information was then used to verify
whether the retinol was delivered to the viable cells or not.
Egawa et al. proposes yet another method to arrive at the location of the SC–epidermis
boundary (32). Their estimation is taken from the depth at which the derivative of the water
concentration profile is almost zero and coined this as the SC apparent thickness (SCAT; also
see the “Applications” section).
The criteria discussed above to arrive at the SC thickness are not fully objective and
probably do not represent the real thickness. Also, the models lack a physical rationale. Van
der Pol et al. first proposed the more objective method for fitting of the water profiles, on the
basis of diffusion of water through the SC–epidermis bilayer (33). The bilayer is thought of as
two homogeneous media with two different (but constant) water diffusion coefficients. The
water flux is considered constant. Under these conditions (Fick’s law), the water concentration
gradients must be linear in both media. The experimental water depth concentration profile is
modeled simply with two linear functions (one in the SC and the other in the epidermis). This
model function is further convoluted by an optical point spread function (a Gaussian function
with a full width at half maximum of 5 mm), to account for the spatial resolution of the confocal
Raman technique. The only variables for the model function are the location of the
discontinuity at the interface of the SC and the epidermis and the two slopes of the water
concentration gradients in both media. The method is now automated and implemented in
routine moisturization efficacy studies on human panelists (34).
APPLICATIONS
Confocal Raman microspectroscopy is now a tool in the study of epidermal and dermal skin in
various skin research groups. For a general review of the role of confocal Raman
microspectroscopy in skin science, including the study of penetration of topically applied
materials, see reference (1). In this section, the published Raman work related to the in vivo
study of the moisturization of the skin is highlighted.
Moisturizing the Skin
A simple way of moisturizing is to wet it with water. In Caspers’ 2000 paper, this was
demonstrated using a wet towel (24). The resulting water depth concentration profiles changed
Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for In Vivo Skin Hydration Measurement
159

=== Page 177 ===
dramatically after application of the wet towel. In the SC, the water concentration increased to
50% to 60%, and swelling of the SC was noted.
Chrit et al. studied the in vivo short-term efficacy of a moisturizing cream (35). A number
of 26 volunteers (Caucasian, female, dry skin) received a treatment of the volar forearm site
with an emollient without hydrating agent and a treatment with a 3% glycerol-containing
cream. A control measurement was included. The normalized water signal was measured at
different depths after one hour of treatment. Signal intensities were then averaged over the
depth range 0 to 20 mm. The glycerol-based cream induced a significant increase in average
water content as compared with baseline, and at every depth between 0 and 20 mm, the water
concentration was higher after the treatment. It is further noted that the shapes of the water
depth concentration profiles did not exhibit a clear change of slope, at the expected depth of
about 15 mm, where the SC–epidermis interface is located. This is most likely caused by a
degraded optical resolution. In this study, a so-called dry microscope objective was applied; in
other words, there was an air gap in between the objective and the skin. This caused a
deterioration of the spatial resolution.
Sieg et al. presented an in vivo 14-volunteer study of forearm skin, but now for a
cumulative treatment (3 weeks) with cosmetic moisturizers (30). The authors calculated the
area under the water concentration profiles, for the entire thickness of the SC. During the
treatment, the thickness of the SC changed, and this was taken into account. A formulation
containing niacinamide was shown to increase the total water content of the SC much more (up
to 2 or 3 times) than the other tested formulations.
Very recently, Stamatas et al. presented in vivo confocal Raman spectroscopy data of skin
penetration and occlusive potential of two vegetable oils and a paraffin oil (36). Petrolatum
was used as a positive control. The products were applied topically on the forearms of nine
volunteers and seven infants, and Raman depth concentration profiles of both the oils and
water were acquired before and at 30 and 90 minutes following application. It was shown that
paraffin and vegetable oils penetrate the top layers of the SC with similar concentration
profiles, a result that was confirmed both for adult and infant skin. The three oils tested
demonstrated modest SC swelling (10–20%) compared to moderate swelling (40–60%) for
petrolatum. The swelling was assessed using the method of van der Pol et al. (33). No statistical
difference between the paraffin oil and vegetable oils in terms of skin penetration and skin
occlusion was observed.
The already mentioned work by Wu and Polefka (27) included moisturization
experiments using products whose effect was already known. On isolated pigskin SC samples,
the following products were tested: lotion, commercial soap bar, syndet bar, non-emollient
shower gel and emollient-containing shower gel. The results were consistent with what was
expected. The water content on the skin treated with lotion was significantly higher than the
nontreated control. Syndet bar-treated skin had significantly higher water content than soap-
based bar-treated sites. Non-emollient shower gel washed sites were more moisturized than
soap-based bar-treated samples. Finally, emollient shower gel-treated skin was significantly
more hydrated than non-emollient shower gel–washed skin.
Water Distribution in the Skin for Different Skin Types
Understanding the hydration processes of the skin also requires knowledge of the state of the
skin prior to treatment. It is likely that different types of skin will respond differently to equal
treatments. Therefore, it is of interest to study differences in water distribution in the skin of
human volunteers of different skin type. Such knowledge will no doubt contribute to the
development of products targeted to these different skin types. The first papers using confocal
Raman microspectroscopy to study different skin types are being published now.
In 2006, Matsumoto et al. presented the results of a systematic study of the water
distribution in the skins of an “old” male Japanese group of volunteers (N ¼ 20, average age
64.0  2.5 years) and a “young” male Japanese group (N ¼ 20, average age 27.8  1.6 years)
(37). Water concentration profiles were recorded on untreated areas on the volar aspect of the
forearm, down to a depth of 200 mm; note that this is well in the dermis. Surprisingly, no
differences in water concentration profile could be detected in the SC and the epidermis.
However, the water content in the upper dermis was found significantly lower for the young
group. Possibly, the mechanically more worn dermis of the old group contains more damages
160
van der Pol and Caspers

=== Page 178 ===
such as voids. These voids may be filled with water. It was concluded that the water content in
the dermis may be a useful parameter for evaluations of aging.
In the already referenced paper by Egawa et al. (32), the SCATs were measured at
different body sites and for different panelist ages (6 male, 9 female). On the forearm, the SCAT
tended to be higher for older skin, but at the cheek no age dependence was found. The volar
forearm skin was hydrated with a wet cotton patch, and measurements were done after 15, 50,
and 90 minutes of hydration. A swelling of the SC was observed of 4%, 40%, and 95%,
respectively. This finding was in agreement with previously reported swelling of a corneocyte,
using cryo-scanning electron microscopy (cryo-SEM) (38). In a later paper, Egawa and Tagami
also addressed the effects of season on the distribution of water in the skin (39).
Infant skin is a subject in itself. A very large panelist study, comparing the barrier
function and water-holding and water-transport properties of a group of infants (N ¼ 124, age
3–12 months) and a group of adults (N ¼ 104, age 14–73 years), was published by Nikolovski
et al. (40). Capacitance, TEWL, and Raman measurement were employed in this study. The SC
was found to be thinner for infants. The capacitance and TEWL values were higher for the
infants, and the variations over the infant panelists were larger. Interestingly, as observed in
the Raman water depth concentration profile, large differences were also observed in the
amount of water that was absorbed after application for only 10 seconds with a wet-soaked
paper towel. Whereas adult skin did not seem to absorb much water, for infant skin a rapid
increase of 5% to –10% by mass of water in the outer 10 mm of the skin was observed.
Desorption rates of water were also studied; the desorption rate for infants was high initially,
followed by a slower rate. Adults only exhibited the slower desorption rate. It was concluded
that the way the SC stores and transports water become adultlike only after the first year of life.
(In this paper, the NMF contents were also compared; they were lower for infants.)
In the paper by Chrit et al. (41), an in vitro study on skin models was combined with an
in vivo study on human volunteer skin, using the Raman technology. The hydration capacities
of 2-methacryloyloxethylphosphorylcholine polymer (pMPC), native or microencapsulated
and with or without hyaluronic acid, were investigated. The in vitro experiments on the skin
models showed the best hydrating properties for the encapsulated-with hyaluronic acid
formulation, which also exhibited the longest lasting efficacy. In a 26-volunteer in vivo study,
using confocal Raman spectroscopy, the encapsulated-with hyaluronic acid formulation was
tested and a statistically significant hydration effect was observed.
Hydration Effects in Dysfunctional Skin
The fact that too much exposure of the skin to water may have unbeneficial effects is long
known, it is said to “dry out” the skin. This is already an example of dysfunctional skin. Van
der Pol et al. demonstrated in 2005 the effects of hot bathing on the composition and
distribution of components (among which water) in the skin (42). In this work, an interesting
experiment was carried out. Following soaking the forearm in hot water for 30 minutes, Raman
water depth concentration profiles were recorded at the same site (the volunteer did not move
his arm) every 30 seconds, after the soaking. First of all, a relatively large swelling of the SC
was observed, but more interestingly, within the first 30 minutes after soaking, the water
redistributed over the SC. The water concentration decreased 5% to 10% by mass around a
depth of 25 mm and increased a similar amount at a depth of about 10 mm. This phenomenon
reflects dynamically the reduction of the barrier function (the barrier function is thought to
reside at the stratum granulosum) as a result of the intense treatment with hot water.
Another way to arrive at dysfunctional skin is removal of the top part of the SC by
sequential tape stripping, thereby disrupting the barrier function. In 2005, Hellemans et al.
presented in vivo results on four volunteers using this approach for volar forearm and facial
skin (43). The results illustrated clearly that for untreated skin, facial SC is thinner than SC of
the forearm. Moreover, after tape stripping, the remaining thinner SC could be observed easily
from the profiles. Remarkably, the remaining thickness of the SC for face and arm after tape
stripping until TEWL ¼ 18 g/m2/hr is nearly identical. Right after disrupting the barrier,
the water concentration over the SC was observed to be higher (as was expected). However,
the recovery response after tape stripping between the external water fluxes, determined with
TEWL, and the internal water content of the SC differed. A fast initial (4 hours) recovery of the
TEWL was observed, whereas the internal water content stayed high, even 24 hours after
Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for In Vivo Skin Hydration Measurement
161

=== Page 179 ===
stripping. This effect may be explained by the release of the lipid content of the lamellar bodies
immediately after barrier disruption. Such a “film of lipids” might keep the internal water
content of the SC elevated, which in turn may facilitate the enzymatic processing required for
the barrier recovery response.
Another way of compromising the integrity of the skin is to simply wipe it with acetone.
The acetone will take away much of the skin lipids present at the outer surface of the SC. Initial
results were obtained by River Diagnostics researchers (unpublished data). Immediately after
wiping, a clear increase in water concentration over the entire SC can be observed. This indicated
a reduced barrier function; the water apparently is leaking out of the epidermal layers.
It is expected that confocal Raman microspectroscopy will also find useful applications in
the study of diseased skin and its treatment (e.g., atopic dermatitis and psoriasis).
DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION, AND OUTLOOK
In vivo confocal Raman microspectroscopy is a novel method that provides detailed
information about the molecular composition of the skin. In this chapter, its application on
the study of hydration was reviewed. Many applications so far have focused on the SC.
However, the method is readily capable of measurements to a depth of greater than 150 mm
into the skin–well into the dermis.
In the past decade, in vivo confocal Raman spectroscopy has made a major leap forward
in sensitivity, speed of measurement, and ease of use. Raman technology has now reached a
level of refinement where it can be applied in routine clinical studies. It has become fast
enough to perform measurements on numbers of subjects ranging from several to several
dozen per day, depending on the complexity of the study. The user interface has reached a
stage of development where routine operation of the equipment by a laboratory technician is
practical. Although the Raman technique has now been shown to be routinely useful in clinical
settings, it is, like all measurement techniques, subject to certain limitations. It involves many
measurements being made at a single location to generate composition depth profiles, whereas
other techniques, such as electrical conductivity, for example, normally take only a single data
point at a given location. This means that even with fast instrumentation, Raman measure-
ments may be time consuming compared to other commonly used methods of in vivo skin
analysis. That is, however, simply the price paid to obtain much greater information content. A
related general issue is that in vivo tissue analysis normally requires considerable replication,
by measurement of multiple locations and on multiple subjects, to achieve required statistical
accuracy, given normal biological variability. This is, of course, a characteristic inherent in any
human in vivo measurements, and not specific to Raman. Finally, Raman instrumentation for
in vivo skin analysis is highly specialized and therefore expensive. However, as in vivo Raman
microspectroscopy comes into more general use, the cost of the instruments eventually can be
expected to drop as volume efficiencies are realized by manufacturers. These limitations are
well compensated by the richness of information achievable and the unique ability to measure
the same area of skin repeatedly and with microscopic spatial detail, allowing entirely new
kinds of information to be gathered. It can be expected that this detailed and spatially resolved
information and the ability to make these measurements in vivo will provide insights into the
mode of action of skin hydration that have not been previously available.
The conclusion and outlook of the role of in vivo confocal Raman microspectroscopy of
skin, in the study of the skin hydration process, is well captured in a citation from the work of
Wu and Polefka (27): “The unique and direct quantitative water content information provided by
confocal Raman microspectroscopy offers a whole new perspective for fundamental skin moisturization
studies and will play an important role in evaluating moisturizing profiles and the hydration potential
of products designed.”
REFERENCES
1. van der Pol A, Riggs WMR, Caspers PJ. In vivo Raman Confocal Microspectroscopy of Skin. In: Sˇasˇic´ S,
ed. Pharmaceutical Applications of Raman Spectroscopy. Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley., 2008:191–219.
2. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Wolthuis R, et al. In vitro and in Vivo Raman spectroscopy of human skin.
Biospectroscopy 1998; 4:S31–S39.
162
van der Pol and Caspers

=== Page 180 ===
3. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Puppels GJ. Combined in vivo confocal Raman spectroscopy and confocal
microscopy of human skin. Biophys J 2003; 85:572–580.
4. Wieland G. Water determination by Karl Fischer titration, theory and application. Darmstadt: GIT
Verlag, 1987.
5. Holbrook KA, Odland GF. Regional differences in the thickness (cell layers) of the human stratum
corneum: an ultrastructural analysis. J Invest Dermatol 1974; 62:415–422.
6. Norle´n L, Emilson A, Forslind B. Stratum corneum swelling: biophysical and computer assisted
quantitative assessments. Arch Dermatol Res 1997; 289:506–513.
7. Warner RR, Myers MC, Taylor DA. Electron probe analysis of human skin: determination of the water
concentration profile. J Invest Dermatol 1988; 90:218–224.
8. Richter T, Peuckert C, Sattlera M, et al. Dead but highly dynamic–the stratum corneum is divided into
three hydration zones. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2004; 17:246–257.
9. Bouwstra JA, Groenink HWW, Kempenaar JA, et al. Water distribution and natural moisturizer factor
content in human skin equivalents are regulated by environmental relative humidity. J Invest
Dermatol 2008; 128:378–388.
10. Berardesca E, Fideli D, Borroni G, et al. In vivo hydration and water-retention capacity of stratum
corneum in clinically uninvolved skin in atopic and psoriatic patients. Acta Derm Venereol 1990;
70:400–404.
11. Loden M, Lindberg M. The influence of a single application of different moisturizers on the skin
capacitance. Acta Derm Venereol 1991; 71(1):79–82.
12. Rogiers V, Derde MP, Verleye G, et al. Standardized conditions needed for skin surface hydration
measurements. Cosmetics and Toiletries 1990; 105:73–82.
13. Tagami H, Ohi M, Iwatsuki K, et al. Evaluation of the skin surface hydration in vivo by electrical
measurement. J Invest Dermatol 1980; 75:500–507.
14. Blichmann CW, Serup J. Assessment of skin moisture: measurement of electrical conductance,
capacitance and transepidermal water loss. Acta Derm Venereol 1988; 68(4):284–290.
15. Fluhr JW, Gloor M, Lazzerini SL, et al. Comparative study of five instruments measuring stratum
corneum hydration (Corneometer CM820 and CM 825, Skicon-200, Nova DPM 9003, and Dermalab):
part I in vitro. Skin Res Technol 1999; 5:161–170.
16. Nilsson GE. Measurement of water exchange through skin. Med Biol Eng Comput 1977; 15:209–218.
17. Imhoff RE, Berg EP, Chilcott RP, et al. New instrument for measuring water vapor flux density from
arbitrary surfaces. IFSCC Magazine 2002; 5(4):297–301.
18. Richard S, Querleux B, Bittoun J, et al. In vivo proton relaxation times analysis of the skin layers by
magnetic resonance imaging. J Invest Dermatol 1991; 97:120–125.
19. Wiechers JW, Snieder M, Dekker NAG, et al. Factors influencing skin moisturization signal using
near-infrared spectroscopy. IFSCC Magazine 2003; 6(1):19–26.
20. Potts RO, Guzek DB, Harris RR, et al. A noninvasive, in vivo technique to quantitatively measure
water concentration of the stratum corneum using attenuated total-reflectance infrared spectroscopy.
Arch Dermatol Res 1985; 277:489–495.
21. Xiao P and Imhof RE. Opto-thermal skin water concentration gradient measurement. SPIE Proc 1996;
2681:31–41.
22. Ciobanu L, Pennington CH. 3D Micron-scale MRI of single biological cells. Solid State Nucl Magnet
Res 2004; 25:138–141.
23. Chunhong Xiao C, Moore DJ, Rerek ME, et al. Feasibility of tracking phospholipid permeation into
skin using infrared and Raman microscopic imaging. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 124:622–632.
24. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Bruining HA, et al. Automated depth-scanning confocal Raman
microspectrometer for rapid in vivo determination of water concentration profiles in human skin.
J Raman Spectrosc 2000; 31:813–818.
25. Chrit L, Hadjur C, Morel S, et al. In vivo chemical investigation of human skin using a confocal Raman
fiber optic microprobe. J Biomed Optics 2005; 10(4):044007-1–044007-11.
26. Bauer NJ, Wicksted JP, Jongsma FH, et al. Noninvasive assessment of the hydration gradient across
the cornea using confocal Raman spectroscopy. Invest Ophthalmol Visual Sci 1998; 39:831–835.
27. Wu J, Polefka TG. Confocal Raman microspectroscopy of stratum corneum: a pre-clinical validation
study. Int J Cosmet Science 2008; 30:47–56.
28. Blank IH, Moloney III J, Emslie AG, et al. The diffusion of water across the stratum corneum as a
function of its water content. J Invest Dermatol 1984; 82:188–194.
29. Caspers PJ, Lucassen GW, Carter EA, et al. In vivo confocal Raman microspectroscopy of the skin:
noninvasive determination of molecular concentration profiles. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 116(3):434–442.
30. Sieg A, Crowther J, Blenkiron P, et al. Measuring the effects of topical moisturizers on stratum
corneum water gradient in vivo. In: Mahadevan-Jansen A, Petrich WH, eds. Biomedical Vibrational
Spectroscopy III: Advances in Research and Industry. Proc SPIE 2006; 6093:157–163.
31. Pudney P, Melot M, Caspers PJ, et al. An in vivo confocal Raman study of the delivery of trans-retinol
to the skin. Appl Spectrosc 2007; 61:804–811.
Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for In Vivo Skin Hydration Measurement
163

=== Page 181 ===
32. Egawa M, Hirao T, Takahashi M. In vivo estimation of stratum corneum thickness from water
concentration profiles obtained with Raman spectroscopy. Acta Derm Venereol 2007; 87(1):4–8.
33. van der Pol A, de Sterke J, Caspers PJ. Modeling and interpretation of water concentration gradients
in the stratum corneum as measured by confocal Raman microspectroscopy. Presentation P15,
Stratum Corneum V, Cardiff, U.K., Jul 10–13, 2007. Int J Cosm Science 2007; 29(3):235.
34. Bielfeldt S, Schoder V, Ely U, et al. Automated assessment of human stratum corneum thickness and
its barrier properties by in vivo confocal Raman spectroscopy. Presentation A1310100, 25th IFSCC
Congress, Barcelona, Spain. 2008.
35. Chrit L, Bastien P, Sockalingum GD, et al. An in vivo randomized study of human skin moisturization
by a new confocal Raman fiber-optic microprobe: assessment of a glycerol-based hydration cream.
Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2006; 19:207–215.
36. Stamatas GN, de Sterke J, Hauser M, et al. Lipid uptake and skin occlusion following topical
application of oils on adult and infant skin. J Dermatol Science 2008; 50(2):135–142.
37. Matsumoto M, Sugawara T, van der Pol A, et al. Comparison of water content in young and old
human skin in vivo using confocal Raman spectroscopy. Poster presentation, National ISBS meeting
“Skin Health Through the Life Stages,” Stone Mountain, Georgia, Oct 12–14, 2006.
38. Bouwstra JA, de Graaff A, Gooris GS, et al. Water distribution and related morphology in human
stratum corneum at different hydration levels. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120:750–758.
39. Egawa M, Tagami H. Comparison of the depth profiles of water and water-binding substances in the
stratum corneum determined in vivo by Raman spectroscopy between the cheek and volar forearm
skin: effects of age, seasonal changes and artificial forced hydration. Br J Dermatol 2008; 158(2):251–260.
40. Nikolovksi J, Stamatas G, Kollias N, et al. Barrier function and water-holding and transport properties
of infant stratum corneum are different from adult and continue to develop through the first year of
life. J Invest Dermatol 2008; 128(7):1728–1736.
41. Chrit L, Bastien P, Biatry B, et al. In vitro and in vivo confocal Raman study of human skin hydration:
assessment of a new moisturizing agent, pMPC. Biopolymers 2007; 85(4):359–369.
42. van der Pol A, Caspers PJ, Puppels GJ, et al. Take a bath. . . the chemistry of bathing assessed by in
vivo confocal Raman spectroscopy. Poster presentation. World Congress on Noninvasive Studies of
the Skin, 2nd Joint Meeting of the ISBS, ISSI and ISDIS; Wilmington, Delaware; Sep 28–Oct 1, 2005.
43. Hellemans L, van der Pol A, van Overloop L, et al. In vivo measurement of dynamics of water
movement across the stratum corneum after barrier disruption. Poster presentation. 35th annual
ESDR meeting; Tu¨bingen, Germany; Sep 22–24, 2005.
164
van der Pol and Caspers

=== Page 182 ===
15
The Correlation Between Transepidermal
Water Loss and Percutaneous Absorption:
An Overview
Jackie Levin
AZCOM, Glendale, Arizona, U.S.A.
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Transepidermal water loss (TEWL) is the outward diffusion of water through skin (1). TEWL
measurements are used to gauge the skin’s water barrier function. An increase in TEWL
reflects impairment of the water barrier (2). TEWL measurements allow parametric evaluation
of the effect of barrier creams against irritants and characterization of skin functionality in
clinical dermatitis and in irritant and allergic patch test reactions (3). An evaporimeter
determines TEWL by measuring the pressure gradient of the boundary layer, resulting from
the water gradient between the skin surface and ambient air. TEWL measurements can be
affected by the anatomical site, sweating, skin surface temperature, inter-and intraindividual
variation, air convection, ambient air temperature and humidity, and instrument-related
variables, to name a few. Although TEWL is influenced by many variables, experiments show
that evaporimeter measurements are reproducible in vitro and in vivo (3,4).
Percutaneous Absorption
Percutaneous absorption refers to the rate of absorption of a topically applied chemical
through the skin. A compound’s absorption rate is important for determining the effectiveness
and/or potential toxicity of topically applied compounds. Since many topical formulations are
used on diseased skin, where the integrity of the permeability barrier is in doubt, the dose
absorbed into the body could vary greatly (5). The rate of absorption in vivo through the
stratum corneum (SC) cannot be described by a zero-or first-order mathematical rate equation,
because the SC is a complex system variable in its penetration properties. Many factors
contribute to the percutaneous absorption of a given chemical. One rate limiting the step of a
compound’s absorption through the skin is the rate of diffusion through the SC. This review
discusses the three main categories that give rise to percutaneous absorption rate variation,
namely, methodology (including the effects of application time, method of measurement, and
physicochemical properties of the topical compound), interindividual variation (including the
effects of skin condition, age of individual, and blood flow), and intraindividual variation
(including the differences between anatomic sites) (6,7).
Why Do We Want to Correlate TEWL and Percutaneous Absorption?
The extensive procedure required to measure percutaneous absorption versus TEWL enhances
the desire to find a correlation between the two measurements to more easily assess skin
barrier function. Experimentation of the correlation between TEWL and percutaneous
absorption has resulted in studies concluding significant quantitative correlation and a few
concluding no quantitative correlation.
The majority of studies investigating TEWL and percutaneous absorption correlation
observe a quantitative correlation. It is our hypothesis that the papers that did not observe
a quantitative correlation (8,9) or observed a weak correlation (1,10) do so because of
assumptions made in the experiment’s design.
Many of the experiments investigating TEWL and percutaneous absorption make large
assumptions, which could affect the results of experimentation, and hence be the source of the
controversy. For example, Tsai et al. (11) and Chilcott et al. (9) assume that an in vitro

=== Page 183 ===
measurement of TEWL and percutaneous absorption is equivalent to in vivo measurements,
whereas Lamaud et al. (12) assume that animal skin may serve as a permeability model for
human skin. Great sources of error and variation can also be induced depending on the
measurement method and type of absorption compound used in obtaining percutaneous
absorption rates. As we do not completely understand the qualitative relationship between
TEWL and percutaneous absorption, it is hard to determine, which assumptions made during
the experiment could be affecting the correlation results. This section investigates the probable
causes that could influence the results of the correlation experiments. Provided in Table 1 is a
summary of the major assumptions made by the studies discussed.
In this section, we review some major studies defining the correlation between
TEWL and percutaneous absorption and discuss major assumptions made in these experi-
ments, which could significantly affect those studies that did not conclude a quantitative
correlation. Provided in Table 2 is a summary of the major assumptions made by the studies
discussed.
Main Review Correlation Studies
Oestmann et al. (1) investigated the correlations between TEWL and hexyl nicotinate (HN)
penetration parameters in man. HN penetration was indirectly measured by laser Doppler
flowmeter (LDF), which quantifies the increase in cutaneous blood flow (CBF) caused by the
penetration of HN, a vasoactive substance. Lipophilic HN was chosen over hydrophilic methyl
nicotinate because HN is a slower penetrant, hence, making it easier to distinguish an intact
barrier from an impaired barrier.
Table 1
Summary of the Permeability and Lipophilicity of all the Compounds Tested
on the Barrier-Disrupted Hairless Mouse
Compound
Partition coefficient (Ko/w)
Correlation coefficient (r )
Sucrose
3.7
0.82
Caffeine
0.02
0.86
Hydrocortisone
1.5
0.82
Estradiol
2.7
0.72
Progesterone
3.9
0.01
Source: From Ref. 11.
Table 2
A Summary of the Major Assumptions Made by the Studies Discussed in This Review
Ref.
In vivo vs.
in vitro
(precabs)a
Skin type
Percutaneous
absorption
measurement
method
Type of absorption
compoundb
Healthy skin
versus
damaged skin
Correlation
results
(1)
Vivo
Human
LDF
Lipophilic
Healthy
Yes
(13)
Vivo
Human
Urinary
Lipophilic
Healthy
Yes
(14)
Vivo
Human
Urinary
Hydrophilic and
lipophilic
Healthy
Yes
(15)
Vivo
Human
Plasma cortisol
level
Lipophilic
Damaged
Yes
(11)c
Vitro
Animal
Diffusion cell
Hydrophilic and
lipophilic
Damaged
Yes
(11)c
Vitro
Animal
Diffusion cell
Highly lipophilic
Damaged
No
(8)
Vivo
Human
LDF
Lipophilic
Damaged
Yes
(9)
Vivo
Animal
Urinary
Lipophilic
Both
Yes
(9)
Vitro
Both
Diffusion cell
Hydrophilic and
lipophilic
Both
No
aAs TEWL in vivo and in vitro measurements are considered equivalent, the authors are only concerned with how
percutaneous absorption measurements were taken.
bType of absorption compound was determined by their octanol-water partition coefficient, Ko/w (Table 1). Values
less than one are hydrophilic and more than three is very lipophilic.
cReference Tsai et al. (11) was divided into two experiments in this table, as the study found a correlation between
TEWL and percutaneous absorption with some compounds and no correlation with others.
Abbreviation: LDF, laser Doppler flowmeter.
166
Levin and Maibach

=== Page 184 ===
LDF parameters t0 and tmax were compared with corresponding TEWL values, and a
weak quantitative negative correlation was made (r ¼ 0.31 and 0.32). This correlation
suggests that when an individual’s response time, t0, was fast, the skin barrier was impaired.
The weak negative correlation found may be because of the percutaneous absorption method
used. The LDF method has some negative attributes and is not as reproducible as other
methods. Further research should investigate this weak correlation between TEWL and
penetration of HN.
Lamaud et al. (12) investigated whether permeability changes of hydrophilic compounds
(TEWL) are correlated to those of lipophilic compounds (hydrocortisone). In the first part of the
experiment, penetration of 1% hydrocortisone and TEWL rates were recorded for the hairless
rats in vivo before and after UV irradiation (660 J/cm2). Both the results, before and after UV
irradiation, correlated well with the TEWL values for application periods up to one hour.
In the second part, drug penetration was evaluated by urinary excretion five days after a
single 24-hour application on normal, stripped, or UV-irradiated skin of hairless rats. The
quantity of drug eliminated correlated with the level of TEWL for up to two days.
These results suggest that TEWL can predict the changes of skin permeability to
lipophilic drugs in normal and some damaged skin.
Lavrijsen et al. (8) characterized the SC barrier function in patients with various
keratinization disorders using two noninvasive methods, namely, measuring outward
transport of water through skin by evaporimetry (TEWL) and the vascular response to HN
penetration into the skin determined by LDF. Three of the five types of keratinization disorders
studied, autosomal dominant ichthyosis vulgaris (ADI), X-linked recessive ichthyosis (XRI),
and autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (CI), have impaired barrier function and are a
type of ichthyosis, whereas the other two keratinization disorders studied, dyskeratosis
follicularis (DD) and erythrokeratoderma variabilis (EKV), have no prior information available
on barrier impairment. In this experiment, the two methods of barrier function assessment,
TEWL and LDF, were correlated.
TEWL measurements and the LDF parameter, t0, showed a high negative correlation in
the patient group (r ¼ 0.64) and a weaker negative correlation among the control group
(r ¼ 0.39). As TEWL reflects the SS-flux of a compound across SC, and parameter t0 is a
function of the duration of the lag phase (non-SS), this study suggests that these two methods
should not be considered as exchangeable alternatives but rather as complementary tests. Each
method reflects a different aspect of the barrier function.
This paper concludes that TEWL and HN penetration injunction are suitable methods to
monitor skin barrier function in keratinization disorders and are helpful in discriminating
between some of these disorders.
Rougier et al. (13) attempted to establish the relationship between the barrier properties
of the horny layer (percutaneous absorption and TEWL) and the surface area of the
corneocytes according to anatomic site, age, and sex in man. The penetration of benzoic acid
(BA) was measured in vivo at seven anatomic sites and compared with its TEWL measurement
taken on the contralateral site. The amount of BA penetrated was measured through urinary
extraction up to 24 hours after application. It was discovered that irrespective of anatomic site
and gender, a linear relationship (r ¼ 0.92, p < 0.001) exists between total penetration of BA
and TEWL.
Comparing corneocyte surface area to permeability, the study found a general correlation
of increasing permeability for both H2O and BA with decreasing corneocyte size. The smaller
the volume of the corneocyte, the greater is the intercellular space available to act as a reservoir
for topically applied molecules (10). This thinking is because of other studies that have shown
that the smaller the capacity of the reservoir, the less the molecule is absorbed (10,14–16).
However, for certain anatomic sites where corneocyte size was similar (980–1000 mm2), there
were large differences in permeability. Therefore, showing that, when percutaneous absorption
and TEWL are quantitatively correlated, corneocyte size only partially explains the difference in
permeability between the different anatomic sites and age of the skin.
Lotte et al. (17) examined the relationship between the percutaneous penetration of four
chemicals (acetyl-salicylic acid, BA, caffeine, and sodium salt of BA) and TEWL in man as a
function of anatomic site. The amount of chemical penetrated was measured by urinary
excretion for up to 24 hours after application. For a given anatomic site, the permeability varies
widely with the nature of the molecule administered because of the physicochemical
The Correlation Between TEWL and Percutaneous Absorption
167

=== Page 185 ===
interactions that occur between the molecule, vehicle, and SC. For all anatomic sites
investigated, irrespective of physicochemical properties of the molecules administered, there
was a linear relationship between TEWL and percutaneous absorption.
Aalto-Korte and Turpeinen (18) attempted to find the precise relationship between
TEWL and percutaneous absorption of hydrocortisone in patients with active dermatitis.
Percutaneous absorption of hydrocortisone and TEWL were studied in three children and six
adults with dermatitis. All the subjects had widespread dermatitis covering at least 60% of the
total skin area. Plasma cortisol concentrations were measured before and two and four hours
after hydrocortisone application by radioimmunoassay. TEWL was measured in six standard
skin areas immediately before application of the hydrocortisone cream. Each individual TEWL
value was calculated as a mean of these six measurements.
The concordance between the postapplication increment in plasma cortisol and mean
TEWL was highly significant, resulting in a correlation coefficient of r ¼ 0.991 ( p < 0.001). In
conclusion, this study found a highly significant correlation between TEWL and percutaneous
absorption of hydrocortisone.
Tsai et al. (11) investigated the relationship between permeability barrier disruption
and the percutaneous absorption of various compounds with different lipophilicity values.
Acetone treatment was used in vivo on hairless mice to disrupt the normal permeability
barrier, and in vivo TEWL measurements were used to gauge barrier disruption. The
hairless mouse skin was then excised and placed in diffusion cells for the in vitro
percutaneous absorption measurements of five model compounds. The permeability and
the lipophilicity of all the compounds tested on the barrier-disrupted hairless mouse are
summarized in Table 1.
The permeability barrier disruption by acetone treatment and TEWL measurements
significantly correlated with the percutaneous absorption of the hydrophilic and lipophilic
drugs, sucrose, caffeine, and hydrocortisone. However, acetone treatment did not alter the
percutaneous penetration of the highly lipophilic compounds, estradiol and progesterone,
hence suggesting that there is no correlation between TEWL and the percutaneous absorption
of highly lipophilic compounds. The results imply the need to use both TEWL and drug
lipophilicity to predict alterations in skin permeability.
Chilcott et al. (9) investigated the relationship between TEWL and skin permeability to
tritiated water (3H2O) and the lipophilic sulfur mustard (35SM) in vitro. No correlation was
found between basal TEWL rates and the permeability of human epidermal membrane to
3H2O ( p ¼ 0.72) or 35SM ( p ¼ 0.74). Similarly, there was no correlation between TEWL rates
and the 3H2O permeability of full-thickness pigskin ( p ¼ 0.68). There was no correlation between
TEWL rates and 3H2O permeability following up to 15 tape strips ( p ¼ 0.64) or four needlestick
punctures ( p ¼ 0.13). These data indicate that under these experimental circumstances TEWL
cannot be used as a measure of skin’s permeability to topically applied compounds.
More on Assumptions
There is no doubt that the best experimental conditions are those that are closest to reality; in
our case, those are TEWL and percutaneous absorption measured in vivo, on human skin, and
using the most reliable percutaneous absorption method of measurement available. It is not a
coincidence that all the studies, which used these ideal experimental conditions, came up with
the same result that TEWL and percutaneous absorption are quantitatively correlated. It is only
the studies, which veered from these most ideal conditions by measuring in vivo or using
animal skin to model human skin or using alternate and less reliable methods or percutaneous
measurement that found no significant quantitative correlation between the two skin barrier
indicators. In the sections below, we will discuss the possible repercussions of varying
experimental conditions that form the ideal.
Using In Vitro Methods to Model In Vivo Experiments
Skin permeation can be measured in human or in vitro by using excised skin in diffusion cells.
In theory, studies using excised skin are feasible models for in vivo experiments, because
passage through the skin is a passive diffusion process and the SC is composed of nonliving
tissue. Many studies comparing in vivo and in vitro TEWL and percutaneous absorption
measurements have been conducted, and the results from those experiments support the
contention that reliable measurements can be obtained from in vitro methodology (6,19–25).
168
Levin and Maibach

=== Page 186 ===
Although the consensus is that in vitro experiments are reasonable models for in vivo
human experiments, some experiments note significant differences between these methods for
measuring skin permeation. The most significant study by Bronaugh and Stewart (23) found
that the effects of UV irradiation could not be duplicated using an in vitro experimentation
model, hence suggesting that in vitro experiments examining the TEWL and percutaneous
absorption after barrier damage may not be an acceptable model for in vivo experimentation.
In vitro damage to the SC barrier may not be an accurate model to in vivo SC damage, because
in vivo exposure to skin irritants results in a cascade of reactions that do not occur in human
cadaver skin (19).
Chilcott et al. (9) investigated TEWL and percutaneous absorption correlation in vitro
after inducing different types of barrier damage. This was also one of the only studies
reviewed, which did not observe a correlation between TEWL and percutaneous absorption.
Perhaps, using in vitro methodology in the experimental design may be responsible for the
lack of correlation to skin damage reported in this study.
Using Animal Skin to Model Human Skin
Comparing the skin morphology and chemical absorption of human versus animal skin, it is
clear that human skin is unique in both aspects and should be used for the most meaningful
results (26). Yet an experiment by Bronaugh et al. (27) found that depending on the compound
of interest and the vehicle used, permeability values obtained using animal skin can be well
within an order of magnitude of the permeability values for human skin.
Independently, in vitro methods and animal skin models prove to be reliable models for
human in vivo absorption. Therefore, it seems logical to assume that in vitro and animal
methods may be used in unison to accurately model in vivo human absorption. However,
Rougier et al. (28) documented a distinct difference between animal studies done in vivo
versus in vitro when compared with human absorption. This experiment compares the skin
permeability of humans to the hairless rat (29) and the hairless mouse (22) using molecules of
widely different physicochemical properties. The results show that, in vivo, for whatever the
molecule tested the permeability ratios remained relatively constant, whereas in vitro they do
not. Therefore, when application conditions are strictly identical in humans and animals, it
may be possible to model human in vivo absorption by measuring in vivo animal absorption
but not using in vitro animal absorption. The inaccurate results obtained when conducting
experiments in vitro using animal skin may have affected the results studied by Tsai et al. (11)
and Chilcott et al., (9), which were the only two papers to conclude no correlation between
TEWL and percutaneous absorption, and these were the only two papers using in vitro animal
methodology.
Percutaneous Absorption Measurement Methods
A major factor affecting percutaneous absorption measurements is methodology (30,31). All
methods for percutaneous absorption measurements are not equal and hence can give
different results. The fourth column of Table 2 summarizes the percutaneous absorption
methods used in these correlation studies.
The most common method for determining percutaneous absorption in vivo is
measuring the radioactivity of excreta, following topical application of a labeled compound.
Determination of percutaneous absorption from urinary radioactivity does not account for
metabolism by skin, but has been proven to be a reliable method for absorption measurement
and is widely accepted as the ‘‘gold standard’’ when available.
The most commonly used in vitro technique involves placing a piece of excised skin in a
diffusion chamber, applying radioactive compound to one side of the skin, and then assaying
for radioactivity in the collection vessel on the other side (32). The advantages of using this
in vitro technique are that the method is easy to use and the results are obtained quickly. The
disadvantage is that the fluid in the collection bath, which bathes the skin, is saline, and though
it may be appropriate for studying hydrophilic compounds, it is not so for hydrophobic
compounds. If the parent compound is not adequately soluble in water, then determining
in vitro permeability into a water receptor fluid will be self-limiting.
When conducting in vitro experiments, animal skin is often substituted for human skin.
Because animal skin has different permeability characteristics from human skin, one should be
careful, which type of animal skin is used (refer to section Using Animal Skin to Model Human
The Correlation Between TEWL and Percutaneous Absorption
169

=== Page 187 ===
Skin). In addition, proper care should be taken in skin preparation of excised skin to make sure
not to damage skin barrier integrity. Anatomical site is as important as using of many different
skin samples.
The only two experiments, which did not find a correlation between TEWL and
percutaneous absorption, by Tsai et al. (11) and Chilcott et al. (9), were those, which measured
percutaneous absorption in vitro. Perhaps, using a diffusion cell to measure percutaneous
absorption is the reason for not finding a correlation.
Oestmann et al. (1) and Lavrijsen et al. (8) used LDF to measure HN penetration. LDF
measures the increase in CBF caused by the penetration of HN, a vasoactive substance. One
problem with this method is that LDF measurements are on the amount of HN absorbed but
also on the individual’s vasoreactivity, gender, and age. This may be the reason that Oestmann
et al. (1) and Lavrijsen et al. (8) obtained only a weak correlation between TEWL and
percutaneous absorption of HN. Another disadvantage of this method is that LDF measure-
ments have many sources of variation, which make it difficult to compare interlaboratory
results. If an attempt should be made, note that LDF parameters t0 and tmax are the function of
HN concentration, the vehicle used, and the application time; the LDF parameters LDFbase and
LDFmax are relative values depending on the type of LDF used.
Type of Compound Used to Measure Percutaneous Absorption
The percutaneous absorption rate and/or total absorption of a compound varies greatly
depending on the compound and its lipophilicity. Yet, many of the papers reviewed did not
consider how lipophilicity of the test compound would affect percutaneous absorption and
hence affect correlation results. Feldmann and Maibach (20) measured both the total
absorption and maximum absorption rate for 20 different compounds of different lipo-
philicities. The range for total absorption for the 20 compounds tested was >250 times,
whereas the difference in maximum absorption rate was >1000-fold (20). Because of the
extreme range of absorption for topically applied compounds, it seems reasonable to assume
that the correlation between TEWL and percutaneous absorption may not be independent of
the physicochemical properties of the compound applied. Namely, can TEWL measurements
predict the skin barrier’s permeability changes to both hydrophilic and very lipophilic
compounds?
Correlation results from many studies, Oestmann et al. (1), Lamaud et al. (12), Lavrijsen
et al. (8), Lotte et al. (17), Aalto-Korte and Turpeinen (18), and Tsai et al. (11), suggest that
TEWL can predict the changes in skin permeability to hydrophilic and slightly lipophilic
topical drugs. Tsai et al. (11) also discovered that the percutaneous absorption of highly
lipophilic compounds does not correlate with TEWL.
The highly lipophilic compounds are the compounds that did not show evidence of a
correlation between percutaneous absorption and TEWL, whereas the moderately lipophilic
compounds, such as hydrocortisone and BA, did. This should be further investigated. In the
future, it may be necessary to use both TEWL and drug lipophilicity to predict alterations in
skin permeability.
EXPLORING THE QUALITATIVE REASONING FOR THE CORRELATION
BETWEEN PERCUTANEOUS ABSORPTION AND TEWL
Yet, despite the significant quantitative correlation demonstrated in some experiments, the
precise qualitative relationship between percutaneous absorption and TEWL remains
unsettled. Is the quantitative correlation just a coincidence or have we not discovered the
link between the two indicators?
Experiments investigating the correlation between TEWL and percutaneous absorption
have found a quantitative correlation between the two skin barrier indicators, yet have failed to
find their precise qualitative relationship. Most experiments looking for an explanation of skin
permeability examine and compare trends in physical aspects of the skin such as SC membrane
thickness, corneocyte size, area of the horny layer, transcorneal routes, sebum lipid film,
intercellular volume, to name a few. Yet we remain clueless about the structure-function
relationship of the SC, because there is no morphological aspect that explains the permeability
of the SC. Skin has particular features, which combine together in varying degrees to produce
170
Levin and Maibach

=== Page 188 ===
different experimental values of TEWL and percutaneous absorption (17). Further investiga-
tion needs to be done regarding the relationship between TEWL and percutaneous absorption
in skin structure and morphology.
CONCLUSION
Although it is not certain why studies by Tsai et al. (11) and Chilcott et al. (9) showed no
quantitative correlation, we can postulate some estimations.
The study by Tsai et al. (11) is the only paper demonstrating a clear distinction between
highly lipophilic compounds and slightly lipophilic compounds, when correlating percuta-
neous absorption and TEWL. Acetone treatment could affect a certain aspect of the skin barrier
that mostly affects and interacts with hydrophilic compounds, hence having no affect on the
highly lipophilic compounds such as estradiol and progesterone. It would be interesting to
ascertain if the same results were obtained when selecting a different form of barrier damage
such as physical tape stripping. Or it could be the fact that the lipophilic compounds chosen
were even more hydrophobic than those used in other experiments, and indeed, TEWL and
percutaneous absorption of highly lipophilic compounds are not correlated.
It is difficult to understand why Chilcott et al. (9) found no correlation between TEWL
and percutaneous absorption. The results could have been affected, because the experiment
was done in vitro, partly on animal skin, using an extremely lipophilic compound, 35SM. It
would be interesting to ascertain if TEWL and percutaneous absorption of 35SM correlated
with the results up to one hour after application.
Taken together, the weight of evidence confirms a relationship between TEWL (water
transport) and percutaneous penetration, yet much remains before this can fully be
generalized and the mechanism understood. Future experiments should take into consider-
ation the effects of modeling realistic situations using alternative methods to the ideal.
REFERENCES
1. Oestmann E, Lavrijsen A, Hermans J, et al. Skin barrier function in healthy volunteers as assessed by
transepidermal water loss and vascular response to hexyl nicotinate: intra-and inter-individual
variability. Br J Dermatol 1993; 128:130–162.
2. Nilsson J. Measurement of water exchange through skin. Med Biol Eng Comput 1997; 15:209–218.
3. Pinnagoda J, Tupker R, Agner T, et al. Guidelines for transepidermal water loss (TEWL)
measurement. Contact Derm 1990; 22:164–178.
4. Pinnagoda J, Tupker P, Coenraads P, et al. Comparability and reproducibility of the results of water
loss measurements: a study of 4 evaporimeters. Contact Derm 1989; 20:241–246.
5. Bronaugh R, Weingarten D, Lowe N. Differential rates of percutaneous absorption through the
eczematous and normal skin of a monkey. J Invest Dermatol 1986; 87:451–453.
6. Noonan P, Gonzalez M. Pharmacokinetics and the variability of percutaneous absorption. J Toxicol
1990; 9(2):511–516.
7. Wester R, Maibach H. Chair’s summary: percutaneous absorption—in vitro and in vivo correlations.
In: Dermatology: Progress and Perspectives. 18th World Congress of Dermatology, New York, June
12–18. New York: The Parthenon Publishing Group, 1993:1149–1151.
8. Lavrijsen A, Oestmann E, Hermans J, et al. Barrier function parameters in various keratinization
disorders: transepidermal water loss and vascular response to hexyl nicotinate. Br J Dermatol 1993;
129:547–554.
9. Chilcott R, Dalton C, Emmanuel A, et al. Transepidermal water loss does not correlate with skin
barrier function in vitro. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 118(5):871–875.
10. Dupuis C, Rougier A, Roguet R, et al. In vivo relationship between horny layer reservoir effect and
percutaneous absorption in human and rat. J Invest Dermatol 1984; 82:353–356.
11. Tsai J, Sheu H, Hung P, et al. Effect of barrier disruption by acetone treatment on the permeability of
compounds with various lipophilicities: implications for the permeability of compromised skin.
J Pharm Sci 2001; 90:1242–1254.
12. Lamaud E, Lambrey B, Schalla W, et al. Correlation between transepidermal water loss and
penetration of drugs. J Invest Dermatol 1984; 82:556.
13. Rougier A, Lotte C, Corcuff P, et al. Relationship between skin permeability and corneocyte size
according to anatomic site, age and sex in man. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1988; 39:15–26.
The Correlation Between TEWL and Percutaneous Absorption
171

=== Page 189 ===
14. Rougier, Dupuis D, Lotte C, et al. In vivo correlation between stranum corneum reservoir function
and percutaneous absorption. J Invest Dermatol 1983; 81:275–278.
15. Rougier A, Lotte C, Maibach H. In vivo percutaneous penetration of some organic compounds related
to anatomic site in man: predictive assessment by the stripping method. J Pharm Sci 1987; 76:451–454.
16. Rougier A, Dupuis D, Lotte C, et al. The measurement of the stratum corneum reservoir. A predictive
method for in vivo percutaneous absorption studies: influence of application time. J Invest Dermatol
1985; 84:66–68.
17. Lotte C, Rougier A, Wilson D, et al. In vivo relationship between transepidermal water loss and
percutaneous penetration of some organic compounds in man: effect of anatomic site. Arch Dermatol
Res 1987; 279:351–356.
18. Aalto-Korte K, Turpeinen M. Transepidermal water loss and absorption of hydrocortisone in
widespread dermatitis. Br J Dermatol 1993; 128:663–635.
19. Nangia A, Camel E, Berner B, et al. Influence of skin irritants in percutaneous absorption. Pharm Res
1993; 10:1756–1759.
20. Feldmann R, Maibach H. Absorption of some organic compounds through the skin in man. J Invest
Dermatol 1970; 54:399–404.
21. Franz T. The finite dose technique as a valid in vitro model for the study of percutaneous absorption
in man. Curr Probl Dermatol 1978; 7:58–68.
22. Bronaugh R, Stewart R. Methods for in vitro percutaneous absorption studies VI: preparation of the
barrier layer. J Pharm Sci 1986; 75:487–491.
23. Bronaugh R, Stewart R. Methods for in vitro percutaneous absorption studies V: permeation through
damaged skin. J Pharm Sci 1985; 74:1062–1066.
24. Bronaugh R, Stewart R. Methods for in vitro percutaneous absorption studies III: hydrophobic
compounds. J Pharm Sci 1983; 73:1255–1258.
25. Bronaugh R, Stewart R, Congdon E, et al. Methods for in vitro percutaneous absorption studies I.
Comparison with the in vivo results. Toxicol Appl Pharm 1982; 62:474–480.
26. Bronaugh R, Franz T. Vehicle effects on percutaneous absorption: in vivo and in vitro comparisons
with human skin. Br J Dermatol 1986; 115:1–11.
27. Bronaugh R, Stewart R, Congdon E. Methods for in vitro percutaneous absorption studies II. Animal
models for human skin. Toxicol Appl Pharm 1982; 62:481–488.
28. Rougier A, Lotte C, Maibach H. The hairless rat: a relevant model to predict in vivo percutaneous
absorption in humans? J Invest Dermatol 1987; 88:577–581.
29. Walker J, Dugard D, Scoot T. In vitro percutaneous absorption studies: a comparison of human and
laboratory species. Hum Toxicol 1983; 2:561–565.
30. Bronaugh R, Maibach H. Percutaneous absorption. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1989.
31. Wester R, Maibach H. Percutaneous absorption in diseased skin. In: Maibach H, Surber C, eds.
Topical Corticosteriods. Basel: Karger, 1992:128–141.
32. Bronaugh R, Maibach H. In vitro percutaneous absorption. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1991.
172
Levin and Maibach

=== Page 190 ===
16
Role of Calcium in the Regulation
of Skin Barrier Homeostasis
Hanafi Tanojo, Gena Y.Y. Chang, Jiun-Wen Guo, and Xinfan Huang
Genepharm, Inc., Sunnyvale, California, U.S.A.
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Some natural products have been shown to benefit the skin, especially for the restoration of
skin barrier. Dead Sea mud and water, balneotherapeutic water preparations, deep sea
sponges, milk, and pearl, for examples, have been used in ancient to modern formulations for
topical application to provide healthy ageless skin. Results were not always well documented,
but the effects have been observed and triggered many investigations. Among many components
within these materials, calcium is one notable ingredient in common.
Calcium is important for human body and involved in many life processes. For instance,
this element plays a crucial role in the growth, death, differentiation, and function of immune
cells. Calcium is also important in the regulation of skin barrier homeostasis, as calcium is
involved in the regeneration process of skin barrier components (1). The role of calcium in skin
is more complex than previously assumed. The elucidation of calcium regulation mechanism
in skin could be useful to understand and solve skin problems.
MECHANISM OF CALCIUM CELL SIGNALING IN SKIN
Calcium is the most abundant metal ion and fifth (after H, O, C, and N) most abundant
element in human body on both an atom and weight basis. Over 98% of body calcium resides
in bones and tooth enamel. The rest, in form of ion Ca2þ, is found throughout body fluids and
takes part in various processes, including muscle contraction, blood clotting, nerve excitability,
intercellular communication, membrane transport of molecules, hormonal responses,
exocytosis, and cell fusion, adhesion, and growth (2).
Calcium ion is used as a universal messenger for living things, even in simple organisms
and plants. The unique combination of its ionic radius and double charge allows Ca2þ to
be specifically recognized and to yield tighter binding to receptors to the exclusion of other
ions, leading to strong, specific binding (3). The specificity enables cells to form special
receptors to assess signals from calcium. For many parts of the body, Ca2þ often acts as a second
messenger in a manner similar to cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Transient increases
in cytosolic Ca2þ concentration trigger numerous cellular responses, including muscle
contraction, release of neurotransmitters, and glycogen breakdown (glycogenolysis), also as
an important activator of oxidative metabolism (4). Ca2þ does not need to be synthesized and
degraded with each message transmission, so it is an energy-efficient signal for the cell (5).
In skin, calcium can provide signals for the cells, either extracellular or intracellular (in
the cytosol). The extra- and intracellular signals are connected to each other, but may also act
separately. In keratinocytes, extracellular Ca2þ levels influence growth and differentiation
(6,7). At low extracellular Ca2þ levels (<0.1 mM), keratinocytes proliferate as a monolayer,
rapidly becoming confluent (6,7). In this condition, keratinocytes never stratify, but show an
undifferentiated, basal cell-like phenotype (8). The cells synthesize keratin proteins and are
connected by occasional gap junctions but not by desmosomes. The cells also synthesize
mainly ceramide type 2 (Cer-NS) and a small amount of ceramide type 3 (Cer-NP) (9).
Keratinocytes grown in low-calcium medium (0.02 mM) maintained intracellular Ca2þ levels
adequate for arachidonic acid metabolism and actually showed increased prostaglandin (PGE2
and PGF2) production up to 4.5 times compared with cells grown at normal Ca2þ level

=== Page 191 ===
(1.2 mM) (10). If this is true for the in vivo condition, a low level of extracellular Ca2þ, for
instance, due to a defective skin barrier may cause an increase in prostaglandin synthesis,
leading to hyperproliferative epidermal disorders, such as psoriasis, which are often associated
with abnormalities in prostaglandin production (11).
Extracellular Ca2þ levels at equal or more than 0.1 mM trigger the differentiation of
keratinocytes and synthesis of a complex pattern of free and covalently bound ceramides (12). The
mRNA levels of keratin 10 (K10) and profilaggrin as well as those of ceramide glucosyltransferase
and glucosylceramide-b-glucosidase increased (9). The early differentiation markers, K1 and K10,
are observed within 8 to 24 hours, then the late markers, loricrin and filaggrin, are shown after 24
to 48 hours (8). Keratinocytes rapidly flatten, form desmosomes, and differentiate with
stratification, while cornified envelopes form in cells of the uppermost layers (6,7).
The response to signaling is also shown in a progressive way. Keratinocytes grown in a
low-calcium media proliferate. Increased extracellular Ca2þ inhibits proliferation, while it
induces differentiation (13). With the increase, K14 expression is downregulated (8). On the
other hand, differentiation of keratinocytes caused a decrease in responsiveness to
extracellular Ca2þ, which may facilitate the maintenance of the high level of intracellular
Ca2þ required for differentiation (14).
Raised extracellular Ca2þ increases intracellular Ca2þ (15–17). This implies that increased
intracellular Ca2þ is the actual signal to trigger keratinocyte differentiation. Intracellular Ca2þ
signals are assessed through calcium-binding proteins to induce responses. The major calcium-
binding protein in skin is calmodulin. Calmodulin regulates target protein by modulating
protein–protein interactions in a calcium-dependent way. Calmodulin regulates many
enzymes, for example, adenyl and guanyl cyclase, phosphodiesterase, ornithine decarbox-
ylase, calcium-calmodulin–dependent protein kinase, transglutaminase, and phospholipase,
which are also found in skin (5).
Both intracellular release and transmembrane flux contribute to the rise in intracellular
Ca2þ (16,17). The rise in keratinocyte intracellular Ca2þ in response to raised extracellular Ca2þ
has two phases: (i) an initial peak, not dependent on extracellular Ca2þ, and (ii) a later phase
that requires extracellular Ca2þ (16). An early response of human keratinocytes to increases in
extracellular Ca2þ is an acute increase in intracellular Ca2þ. Stepwise addition of extracellular
Ca2þ to neonatal human keratinocytes is followed by a progressive increase in intracellular
Ca2þ, where the initial spike of increased intracellular Ca2þ is followed by a prolonged plateau
of higher intracellular Ca2þ (18). The response of intracellular Ca2þ to increased extracellular
Ca2þ in keratinocytes is saturated at 2-mM extracellular Ca2þ (18,19). The response of
intracellular Ca2þ to increased extracellular Ca2þ in keratinocytes resembles the response in
parathyroid cells, in that a rapid and transient increase in intracellular Ca2þ is followed by a
sustained increase in intracellular Ca2þ above basal level. This multiphasic response is
attributed to an initial release of Ca2þ from intracellular stores followed by an increased influx
of Ca2þ through voltage-independent cation channels. The keratinocyte and parathyroid cell
contains a similar cell membrane calcium receptor thought to mediate this response to
extracellular Ca2þ. This receptor can activate the phospholipase-C pathway, leading to an
increase in the levels of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) and sn-l,2-diacylglycerol (DAG)—both
of which are important messengers—as well as stimulating Ca2þ influx and chloride currents
(20,21). IP3 causes release of Ca2þ from internal stores, such as endoplasmic reticulum, further
increasing intracellular level to precede a number of calcium-stimulated cellular events (22).
DAG forms a quarternary complex with phosphatidylserine, calcium, and protein kinase C to
activate the kinase, which will accelerate terminal differentiation (13). The signal transduction
mediated through calmodulin induces other proteins, for example, desmocalmin, which is
associated with the formation of desmosomes (23).
REGULATION OF CALCIUM GRADIENT
The regulation of calcium in skin shows an ingenious adaptation of living organisms to the
presence of this ion. As Ca2þ cannot be metabolized like other second-messenger molecules,
cells tightly regulate intracellular levels through numerous binding and specialized extrusion
proteins (24). The concentration of calcium in extracellular spaces (generally *1.5 mM) is four
orders of magnitude higher than in the cytosol (*0.1 mM). In excitable cells, for example,
174
Tanojo et al.

=== Page 192 ===
muscle cells, the extracellular concentration of calcium must be closely regulated to keep it at
its normal level of *1.5 mM, so that it cannot accidentally trigger the muscle contraction, the
transmission of nerve impulses, and blood clotting (4). In other cells, including keratinocytes,
the extracellular level is similarly maintained in a specific equilibrium with the intracellular
concentration.
Ca2þ also regulates melanin production in melanocyte; one way is through its ability to
act as a cofactor for phenylalanine hydroxylase, which catalases the conversion of
L-phenylalanine to L-tyrosine, the precursor of melanin (25). As with keratinocytes, low
extracellular Ca2þ concentrations increase the proliferation of melanocytes, whereas high
concentration does not show effect (26). Elevations in intracellular Ca2þ concentration have an
inhibitory effect on the melanin production (27), but if coupled with the increase of cAMP,
elevated intracellular Ca2þ level stimulates melanogenesis (28).
It is important for the cells to keep the intracellular calcium level low. A low-calcium
concentration makes the use of the ion as an intracellular messenger energetically inexpensive.
The movement of calcium ions across membranes requires energy, usually supplied by
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). If the resting level of calcium in the cell were high, a large
number of ions would need to be transported into the cytoplasm to raise the concentration by the
factor of 10, which is ordinarily needed to activate an enzyme; afterward the excess calcium
would have to be expelled from the cell. The normally low-calcium level means that relatively
few ions need to be moved, with a relatively small expenditure of energy, to regulate an enzyme.
In contrast, energetic cost of regulation by the other important intracellular messenger, cAMP, is
high; it must be synthesized and broken down each time it carries a message, and both steps
requires a significant investment of energy (3). Furthermore, low intracellular calcium is a
necessary condition for the phosphate-driven metabolism characteristic of higher organisms. The
energy-rich fuel for most cellular processes is ATP. Its breakdown releases inorganic phosphate.
If the intracellular concentration of Ca2þ were high, the phosphate and the calcium would
combine to form a precipitate of hydroxyapatite crystals, the same stony substance found in
bone, and the calcification would ultimately doom the cell (3).
The large concentration gradient between extracellular spaces and cytosol is maintained by
the active transport of Ca2þ across the plasma membrane, the endoplasmic reticulum (or the
sarcoplasmic reticulum in muscle), and the mitochondrial inner membrane. Generally, plasma
membrane and endoplasmic reticulum each contain a Ca2þ-ATPase that actively pumps Ca2þ
out of the cytosol at the expense of ATP hydrolysis (4). Mitochondria act as a “buffer” for
cytosolic Ca2þ. If cytosolic concentration of calcium rises, the rate of mitochondrial Ca2þ influx
increases while that of Ca2þ efflux remains constant, causing the mitochondrial concentration of
Ca2þ to increase, while the cytosolic concentration of Ca2þ decreases to its original level (its set
point). Conversely, a decrease in cytosolic concentration of Ca2þ reduces the influx rate, causing
net efflux of concentration of Ca2þ and an increase of cytosolic concentration of Ca2þ back to the
set point (4). In melanocytes, Ca2þ homeostasis is regulated by melanin (29). Addition of high
Ca2þ concentration to melanocytes kept in Ca2þ-free medium shows different type of increase
between poorly and well-melanized melanocytes. This may be the result of the different content
of melanin, which provides clearance of cytoplasmic Ca2þ into melanosomes (29). The strong
Ca2þ-binding capacity of melanin (particularly inside melanosomes) is evident in its protective
characteristic against DNA damage induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS) in both
melanocytes and keratinocytes (30). It was reported that H2O2 and other reactive oxygen
compounds induce increases in intracellular Ca2þ concentration and disrupt intracellular Ca2þ
homeostasis, causing DNA strand breaks (31). On the other hand, the presence of melanin
reduces intracellular Ca2þ level and stabilizes intracellular Ca2þ homeostasis (29).
Besides the already mentioned Ca2þ-ATPase, the transport of Ca2þ is regulated by a
series of calcium pumps, transport systems, and ion channels. The availability of certain
regulatory systems is dependent on the activity of the cells. In excitable cells such as cardiac
muscle, the influx of Ca2þ to cytosol is regulated by voltage- (or potential-) dependent
channels, while the efflux (out of cytosol) is regulated by cation exchanger, such as Naþ-Ca2þ
exchanger (5). Undifferentiated keratinocytes in the basal layer have different sets of Ca2þ
transport system than differentiated cells in the upper layers. In basal layer, the system consists
of 14-pS nonspecific cation channels (NSCC) (32) and does not possess functional voltage-
sensitive Ca2þ channels (17). Differentiated keratinocytes are likely to possess at least two and
possibly three pathways of Ca2þ influx: (i) nicotinic channel (nicotinic acetylcholine receptor or
Role of Calcium in the Regulation of Skin Barrier Homeostasis
175

=== Page 193 ===
nAChR); (ii) voltage-sensitive Ca2þ channels (VSCC) which can be blocked by nifedipine or
verapamil; and (iii) NSCC, which is not activated by nicotine (33).
Other than the high-calcium gradient between extra- and intracellular domains of
keratinocytes, a calcium gradient is present within the epidermis, with higher quantities of
Ca2þ in the upper than in the lower epidermis, as the cell moves from the basal layer to the
stratum granulosum (SG) (34). Ca2þ concentration increases steadily from the dermal-
epidermal junction to the region just below the stratum corneum (SC), while this is not the case
with other ions (35). Figure 1 illustrates the calcium gradient in human skin in comparison
with an actual literature data (36). Such a gradient is not observed in skin abnormalities related
to the formation of abnormal barrier function, such as psoriasis (37). Studies in mice and rats
showed that this gradient exists at the same time as the formation of a maturing skin barrier at
the end of gestation. The gradient is then maintained from the newborn throughout the adult
life (38), although it tends to change with aging. It is not yet clear whether the calcium gradient
leads to the formation of a mature barrier or the barrier caused the gradient. It may even be
both if the regulation uses a feedback mechanism, as the differentiation will eventually form a
barrier leading to the accumulation of Ca2þ in the upper epidermis. This high level of Ca2þ
will, in turn, guarantee the ongoing process of differentiation toward the formation of
corneocytes, fully differentiated keratinocytes in SC. The mechanism is thus almost completely
autonomous and perpetual and, if it runs smoothly, requires little correction from the body.
SKIN BARRIER HOMEOSTASIS AND REPAIR
The skin barrier function is connected to the chemical and physical condition of SC, the
uppermost layer of the epidermis, where the final phase of keratinocyte differentiation into
corneocytes takes place. Skin barrier gives protection against desiccation and environmental
Figure 1
Illustration of calcium gradient in epidermis based on literature data. Abbreviations: SB, stratum basale/
basal layer; SS, stratum spinosum; SG, stratum granulosum; SC, stratum corneum. Source: From Ref. 36.
176
Tanojo et al.

=== Page 194 ===
challenge by regulating water flux and retention (39). The optimal level of hydration maintained
in skin barrier layer is largely dependent on three components, which are constantly regenerated
particularly in SC, namely, (i) intercellular lamellar lipids, as an effective barrier to the passage of
water; (ii) corneocytes, which provide the tortuous diffusion path created by the SC layers and
corneocyte envelopes that retard water loss, and (iii) natural moisturizing factor (NMF), a
complex mixture of low–molecular weight, water-soluble compounds first formed within the
corneocytes by degradation of the histidine-rich protein known as filaggrin. Disturbance to the
regeneration processes of these components, in which calcium plays a significant role as
mentioned above, results in dry, flaky skin conditions (40). At normal calcium gradient
condition, Ca2þ induces synthesis of intercellular lipid (41), full terminal differentiation into
corneocytes (42), and the formation of the cornified envelope (43). Abnormal calcium
distribution in aging people has been linked to fragile skin barrier in elderly (44).
Disruption of the barrier with acetone treatment or tape stripping depletes Ca2þ from the
upper epidermis, resulting in the loss of the Ca2þ gradient (45–47). This is due to accelerated
water transit that leads to the increased passive loss of Ca2þ into and through SC (45,47),
because the permeability of SC to Ca2þ dramatically increased after SC was pretreated with
acetone or sodium lauryl sulfate solution (48). The permeability of skin to Ca2þ ions has been
known from some dermatoses, such as calcinosis cutis (49–51) and perforating verruciform
collagenoma (52). In a shorter term, calcinosis cutis developed after a 24-hour (at least) topical
application of an electrode paste containing saturated calcium chloride solution, bentonite, and
glycerin, which are used for examination by electroencephalography or electromyography
(53,54). The permeability of human skin to Ca2þ ions in vitro shows a marked dependence on
anatomic site. In agreement with the data observed for nonelectrolytes, permeation decreased
in the following order: foreskin > mammary > scalp > thigh. Mouse and guinea pig skin show
comparable permeability to that of human scalp. Ca2þ transport from dermis across epidermis
is higher than that from epidermis to dermis (55,56). Using a technique to continuously
monitor the low level of Ca2þ flux across human SC in vitro, the flux through untreated human
SC was shown to be sigmoidal. After SC was pretreated with acetone or sodium lauryl sulfate,
the shape of the curve was similar, but the Ca2þ flux was significantly higher (48).
The decrease in Ca2þ levels in the outer epidermis is associated with enhanced lamellar
body secretion and lipid synthesis (important components in repair responses) (45,57).
Experiment in mice shows that after the calcium gradient disappears following acute
permeability barrier disruption, the gradient returns after six hours in parallel with barrier
recovery. This indicates that skin barrier formation (through restriction of transcutaneous
water movement) could regulate the formation of the epidermal calcium gradient (58). Note
that the barrier repair in response to the skin barrier disruption is not the same as the normal
barrier regeneration process. The response is an emergency step to quickly reduce the
transepidermal water loss to its set point and thereby returning the calcium gradient to its
natural condition (45). Once the calcium gradient is normalized, the normal skin barrier
regeneration takes place. The process of barrier repair in connection with transepidermal water
loss and calcium gradient is illustrated in Figure 2.
Addition of high calcium concentration during the barrier disruption process will induce
higher influx of calcium into epidermal keratinocytes, which delays the emergency skin barrier
repair process (59). Also, if Ca2þ gradient can be preserved after skin barrier disruption by the
addition of Ca2þ into the media, or occlusion of barrier-disrupted skin with water vapor-
impermeable membrane, lamellar body secretion, lipid synthesis, and emergency barrier
recovery are inhibited (57,60). The inhibition raised by high extracellular concentration of Ca2þ
is potentiated by high extracellular potassium (Kþ) (61). However, during this delay, and if the
applied calcium concentration is within the right physiological range, the normal skin
regeneration process can take place and the normal barrier function is restored without the
formation of intermediate emergency barrier. This is indicated in a study on the cultured
keratinocytes that extracellular calcium in physiological range of concentration is not a
sufficient signal for growth arrest when other growth conditions are optimized (62).
Another study confirmed that barrier recovery is accelerated by the decreased level of
Ca2þ and also Kþ during an increased water loss, since water loss may induce a decrease in the
Ca2þ concentration in the upper epidermis, which, in turn, may stimulate lamellar body
secretion and barrier repair (63). Furthermore, the inhibition raised by high extracellular Ca2þ
concentration is reversed by nifedipine or verapamil, which are specific calcium channel
Role of Calcium in the Regulation of Skin Barrier Homeostasis
177

=== Page 195 ===
blockers (61). In another study, administration of Ca2þ-free solutions by sonophoresis resulted
in a marked decrease in Ca2þ content in the upper epidermis, and subsequently the loss of the
Ca2þ gradient was accompanied by accelerated lamellar body secretion (a sign of emergency
skin barrier repair) (64).
Dry, itchy, and scaly skin symptoms are frequently linked to an impaired skin barrier
function, as observed in psoriasis, ichtyosis, atopic skin, and contact eczemas (65). Psoriatic
lesions have been directly related to the loss of the normal calcium gradient in epidermis (37).
The abnormal calcium gradient is shown in the people with atopic skin (66). In chronic
hemodialysis patients, the commonly incident of uremic pruritus is found linked to the
disrupted calcium gradient, especially with higher Ca2þ deposition in the extracellular fluid
and cytoplasm of basal cells, and in the extracellular fluid, nuclei and cytoplasm of spinous
cells compared with the non-pruritus group (67). On the other hand, studies on reconstructive
epidermis have clearly demonstrated that once Ca2þ distribution profile is restored to normal,
the terminal differentiation and SC barrier formation is improved (68). These facts indicate that
restoration of Ca2þ gradient may lead to alleviation of dry, itchy, scaly, and other adverse skin
symptoms related to skin barrier function.
TOPICAL APPLICATION OF CALCIUM
With the understanding that decreased Ca2þ level at the suprabasal cell layers results in
abnormal differentiation, it is logical to attempt calcium supplementation by topical
application. However, there are two difficulties in this approach. Topical application of high
level of calcium alone is not recommended, because it may lead to calcitosis cutis, as seen in
long-term occupational exposure to high levels of dissolved calcium, for example, in miners
(49), agricultural laborers (50), and oil field workers (51). Secondly, if Ca2þ level in the basal
cell layer increases after such application, then it causes disturbance of keratinocyte
proliferation, reducing epidermal growth rate, and also may cause symptoms such as
detected in uremic pruritus patients (67). The normalization of distribution of calcium ion
requires high concentration below SG and SC interface (68), thus requires delivery of calcium
below the skin barrier region in SC. As learned from the therapy using natural resources,
topical application of calcium apparently should be accompanied in certain balance with other
ions, such as sodium, potassium, magnesium, chlorides, and bromides, and also the delivery of
calcium should be targeted only to the suprabasal cell layers (69).
As mentioned earlier, Dead Sea mud and water, balneotherapeutic water preparations,
deep sea sponges, milk, and pearl are among natural products that contain high-calcium level
in balance with other ions and demonstrate beneficial effects for skin barrier–related disorders.
The restoration of normal barrier function during the application of high concentration of
calcium is evident from the effect of bathing in the calcium-rich Dead Sea water to improve
skin diseases related to skin barrier impairment (70) as well as to enhance skin hydration and
Figure 2
Illustration of skin barrier repair in epidermis. Abbreviations: SC, stratum corneum; SG, stratum
granulosum; TEWL, transepidermal water loss; ELS, epidermal lipid synthesis.
178
Tanojo et al.

=== Page 196 ===
reduce inflammation in atopic dry skin (71). Other products such as milk and pearl have been
used for specialty cosmetics for centuries in many countries. Although many components in
milk may also contribute to the effects on skin, such as its biopeptide (72), milk is generally
known as natural resource for calcium. In China, pearl powder has been investigated for
various treatments (73).
Skin therapy with natural mineral waters has been intensively studied. The analysis of
various water sources with clear benefits revealed unanimously high content of Ca2þ,
compared with other natural water springs (74). One study of spa therapy has been reported
on the basis of well-documented records on spa treatment in the 18th and 19th century in Bath,
England. One of the factors that contributed to the success of this spa therapy is attributed to
the large quantities of water rich in calcium found in the area (75).
It is possible that the effect of other ions also contributes to the positive outcome of the
therapy. Magnesium, another divalent cation abundantly found in the body and in beneficial
mineral waters, provides vasodilation, thereby lowering blood pressure effect, supposedly
through its competition with cellular calcium (76). Bromides found in the thick haze
overhanging the Dead Sea are also cited to have particularly improved psoriatic conditions
(74). Sodium and potassium can also contribute to the ionic balance in the epidermis, as shown
in the beneficial study of seawater to skin disorders (77). Some other elements such as
selenium, zinc, rubidium, and sulfur may also provide additional effects, although their
concentrations in mineral waters are generally low (74).
Specific topical formulations containing calcium in a mixture with other ions, sodium,
potassium, magnesium, chloride, and bromide, have been used as adjunctive treatment for
skin barrier restoration, which is also applicable for post treatment of cosmetical procedure,
such as microdermabrasion or photothermolysis. The formulation is shown to accelerate the
restoration of a quality skin barrier and alleviate scaly skin symptoms related to skin barrier
disruption in relatively short time because of its ability to restore epidermal calcium gradient
(78). This type of therapy might be considered safer than the application of calcium channel
modulators or growth factors because of the additional adverse effects.
CONCLUSION
Calcium ions play an important role in the homeostasis of skin barrier. A change in the barrier
will change the calcium ion gradient in skin and lead to disturbance in the skin barrier
regeneration process. A severe change might lead into a high degree of calcium signaling,
which may induce the activation of various processes, from increased synthesis of skin
components or messengers to the inflammatory reactions. All these are important factors
leading to impaired skin conditions. The regulation of calcium in skin is therefore necessary to
maintain a good skin barrier function and to avoid abnormal skin symptoms. Application of
topical preparations containing relatively high level of calcium in balance with other ions and
targeted delivery to suprabasal cell layers has been shown to help the skin barrier recovery and
homeostasis. Ranging from natural products to laboratory compositions, the preparations are
getting more acknowledgments from dermatological experts, not only because of the safe but
effective results for therapy but also for more understanding on the effects of calcium on skin
health in general.
REFERENCES
1. Tanojo H, Maibach HI. Role of calcium ions in relation to skin barrier function. In: Bronaugh RL,
Maibach HI, eds. Percutaneous Absorption: Drugs - Cosmetics - Mechanisms - Methodology. 3rd ed.
New York: Marcel Dekker, 1999:939–950.
2. Sigel H. Calcium and Its Role in Biology. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1984.
3. Carafoli E, Penniston JT. The calcium signal. Scientific American 1985; 253(5):70–78.
4. Voet D, Voet JG. Biochemistry. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1990.
5. Fairley JA. Calcium: a second messenger. In: Goldsmith LA, ed. Physiology, Biochemistry, and
Molecular Biology of the Skin. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991:314–328.
6. Hennings H, Michael D, Cheng C, et al. Calcium regulation of growth and differentiation of mouse
epidermal cells in culture. Cell 1980; 19:245–254.
Role of Calcium in the Regulation of Skin Barrier Homeostasis
179

=== Page 197 ===
7. Pillai S, Bikle DD, Hincenbergs M, et al. Biochemical and morphological characterization of growth
and differentiation of normal human neonatal keratinocytes in a serum-free medium. J Cell Physiol
1988; 134:229–237.
8. Lee SH, Jeong SK, Ahn SK. An update of the defensive barrier function of skin. Yonsei Med J 2006;
47(3):293–306.
9. Breiden B, Gallala H, Doering T, et al. Optimization of submerged keratinocyte cultures for the
synthesis of barrier ceramides. Eur J Cell Biol 2007; 86(11–12):657–673.
10. Fairley JA, Weiss J, Marcelo CL. Increased prostaglandin synthesis by low calcium-regulated
keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol 1988; 86:173–176.
11. Hammarstro¨m S, Lindgren JA, Marcelo CL, et al. Arachidonic acid transformations in normal and
psoriatic skin. J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73:180–183.
12. Ponec M. Lipid metabolism in cultured keratinocytes. Adv Lipid Res 1991; 24:83–118.
13. Hennings H, Holbrook KA, Yuspa SH. Factors influencing calcium-induced terminal differentiation
in cultured mouse epidermal cells. J Cell Physiol 1983; 116:265–281.
14. Bikle DD, Ratnam A, Mauro TM, et al. Changes in calcium responsiveness and handling during
keratinocyte differentiation. J Clin Invest 1996; 97:1085–1093.
15. Pillai S, Bikle DD. A differentiation-dependent, calcium-sensing mechanism in normal human
keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol 1989; 92:500.
16. Kruszewski FH, Hennings H, Yuspa SH, et al. Regulation of intracellular free calcium in normal
murine keratinocytes. Am J Physiol 1991; 261:C767–C773.
17. Reiss M, Lipsey LR, Zhou ZL. Extracellular calcium-dependent regulation of transmembrane calcium
fluxes in murine keratinocytes. J Cell Physiol 1992; 147:281–291.
18. Pillai S, Bikle DD. Role of intracellular-free calcium in the cornified envelope formation of
keratinocytes: differences in the mode of action of extracellular calcium and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.
J Cell Physiol 1991; 146:94–100.
19. Sharpe GR, Gillespie JI, Greenwell JR. An increase in intracellular free calcium is an early event
during differentiation of cultured keratinocytes. Federation of Europe Biochemical Societies’ Letters
1989; 254:25–28.
20. Shoback DM, Membreno LA, McGhee JG. High calcium and other divalent cations increase inositol
trisphosphate in bovine parathyroid cells. Endocrinol. 1988; 123:382–389.
21. Brown EM, Chen CJ, Kifor O, et al. Ca2þ-sensing, second messengers, and the control of parathyroid
hormone secretion. Cell Calcium 1990; 11:333–337.
22. Berridge MJ, Irvine RF. Inositol triphosphate, a novel second messenger in cellular signal
transduction. Nature (London) 1984; 312:315–321.
23. Tsukita S, Tsukita S. Desmocalmin: a calmodulin-binding high molecular weight protein isolated
from desmosomes. J Cell Biol 1985; 101:2070–2080.
24. Clapham DE. Calcium signaling. Cell 1995; 80:259–268.
25. Schallreuter KU, Wood JM. The importance of L-phenylalanine transport and its autocrine turnover to
L-tyrosine for melanogenesis in human epidermal melanocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999;
262(2):423–428.
26. Abdel-Naser MB. Differential effects on melanocyte growth and melanization of low vs. high calcium
keratinocyte-conditioned medium. Br J Dermatol 1999; 140(1):50–55.
27. Carsberg CJ, Jones KT, Sharpe GR, et al. Intracellular calcium modulates the responses of human
melanocytes to melanogenic stimuli. J Dermatol Sci 1995; 9(3):157–164.
28. Buffey JA, Edgecombe M, Mac Neil S. Calcium plays a complex role in the regulation of
melanogenesis in murine B16 melanoma cells. Pigment Cell Res 1993; 6(6):385–393.
29. Hoogduijn MJ, Smit NP, van der Laarse A, et al. Melanin has a role in Ca2þ homeostasis in human
melanocytes. Pigment Cell Res 2003; 16(2):127–132.
30. Hoogduijn MJ, Cemeli E, Ross K, et al. Melanin protects melanocytes and keratinocytes against H2O2-
induced DNA strand breaks through its ability to bind Ca2þ. Exp Cell Res 2004; 294(1):60–67.
31. Gen W, Tani M, Takeshita J, et al. Mechanisms of Ca2þ overload induced by extracellular H2O2 in
quiescent isolated rat cardiomyocytes. Basic Res Cardiol 2001; 96(6):623–629.
32. Mauro TM, Isseroff RR, Lasarow R, et al. Ion channels are linked to differentiation in keratinocytes.
J Membr Biol 1993; 132:201–209.
33. Grando SA, Horton RM, Mauro TM, et al. Activation of keratinocyte nicotinic cholinergic receptors
stimulates calcium influx and enhances cell differentiation. J Invest Dermatol 1996; 107(3):412–418.
34. Menon GK, Grayson S, Elias PM. Ionic calcium reservoirs in mammalian epidermis: ultrastructural
localization by ion-capture cytochemistry. J Invest Dermatol 1985; 84(6):508–512.
35. Forslind B, Lindberg M, Malmqvist KG, et al. Human skin physiology studied by particle probe
microanalysis. Scanning Microsc 1995; 9(4):1011–1026.
36. Malmqvist KG, Forslind B, Themner K, et al. The use of PIXE in experimental studies of the
physiology of human skin epidermis. Biol Trace Elem Res 1987; 12:297–308.
180
Tanojo et al.

=== Page 198 ===
37. Menon GK, Elias PM. Ultrastructural localization of calcium in psoriatic and normal human
epidermis. Arch Dermatol 1991; 127:57–63.
38. Elias PM, Nau P, Hanley K, et al. Formation of the epidermal calcium gradient coincides with key
milestones of barrier ontogenesis in the rodent. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 110(4):399–404.
39. Harding CR. The stratum corneum: structure and function in health and disease. Dermatol Ther 2004;
17 Suppl 1:6–15.
40. Rawlings AV, Harding CR. Moisturization and skin barrier function. Dermatol Ther 2004; 17 Suppl 1:
43–48.
41. Watanabe R, Wu K, Paul P, et al. Up-regulation of glucosylceramide synthase expression and activity
during human keratinocyte differentiation. J Biol Chem 1998; 273(16):9651–9655.
42. Watt FM. Terminal differentiation of epidermal keratinocytes. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1989; 1(6):
1107–1115.
43. Nemes Z, Steinert PM. Bricks and mortar of the epidermal barrier. Exp Mol Med 1999; 31(1):5–19.
44. Denda M, Tomitaka A, Akamatsu H, et al. Altered distribution of calcium in facial epidermis of aged
adults. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 121(6):1557–1558.
45. Menon GK, Elias PM, Lee SH, et al. Localization of calcium in murine epidermis following disruption
and repair of the permeability barrier. Cell Tissue Research 1992; 270(3):503–512.
46. Mauro TM, Rassner U, Bench G, et al. Acute barrier disruption causes quantitative changes in the
calcium gradient. J Invest Dermatol 1996; 106:919.
47. Man M-Q, Mauro TM, Bench G, et al. Calcium and potassium inhibit barrier recovery after disruption,
independent of the type of insult in hairless mice. Exp Dermatol 1997; 6:36–40.
48. Tanojo H, Cullander C, Maibach HI. Monitoring the permeation of calcium ion across human stratum
corneum using an ion-selective microelectrode with high spatial resolution. In: Brain KR, ed.
Perspectives in Percutaneous Penetration. 6b ed. Cardiff: STS Publishing, 2000.
49. Sneddon IB, Archibald RM. Traumatic calcinosis of the skin. Br J Dermatol 1958; 70:211–214.
50. Christensen OB. An exogenous variety of pseudoxanthoma elasticum in old farmers. Acta Dermato-
Venereologica (Stockholm) 1978; 58:319–321.
51. Wheeland RG, Roundtree JM. Calcinosis cutis resulting from percutaneous penetration and
deposition of calcium. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 12:172–175.
52. Moulin G, Balme B, Musso M, et al. Perforating verruciform collagenoma, an exogenous inclusion-
linked dermatosis? Report of one case induced by calcium chloride. Ann Dermatol Venereol 1995;
122:591–594.
53. Mancuso G, Tosti A, Fanti PA, et al. Cutaneous necrosis and calcinosis following electroencephalog-
raphy. Dermatologica 1990; 181:324–326.
54. Johnson RC, Fitzpatrick JE, Hahn DE. Calcinosis cutis following electromyographic examination.
Cutis 1993; 52:161–164.
55. Stu¨ttgen G, Betzler H. Zur Frage der Permeation von Elektrolyten durch die Haut. I. Mitteilung:
Vitroversuche mit radioaktivmarkierten Caþþ, SO4
, und PO4
 Ionen an Meerschweinchen- und
Ma¨usehaut. Archiv fu¨r klinische und experimentelle Dermatologie 1956; 203:472–482.
56. Stu¨ttgen G, Betzler H. Zur Frage der Permeation von Elektrolyten durch die Haut. II. Mitteilung:
In vitro- und vivo-Versuche an menschlicher Haut mit
45Caþþ. Archiv fu¨ r klinische und
experimentelle Dermatologie 1957; 204:165–174.
57. Lee SH, Elias PM, Proksch E, et al. Calcium and potassium are important regulators of barrier
homeostatis in murine epidermis. J Clin Invest 1992; 89:530–538.
58. Elias P, Ahn S, Brown B, et al. Origin of the epidermal calcium gradient: regulation by barrier status
and role of active vs passive mechanisms. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 119(6):1269–1274.
59. Denda M, Inoue K, Fuziwara S, et al. P2X purinergic receptor antagonist accelerates skin barrier repair
and prevents epidermal hyperplasia induced by skin barrier disruption. J Invest Dermatol 2002;
119(5):1034–1040.
60. Lee SH, Elias PM, Feingold KR, Mauro TM. A role for ions in barrier recovery after acute
perturbation. J Invest Dermatol 1994; 102:976–979.
61. Lee M, Garbiras BJ. Efficient synthesis of benzoic acid half mustards. Synthetic Communications 1994;
24(21):3129–3134.
62. Boisseau AM, Donatien P, Surleve-Bazeille JE, et al. Production of epidermal sheets in a serum free
culture system: a further appraisal of the role of extracellular calcium. J Dermatol Sci 1992; 3(2):
111–120.
63. Grubauer G, Feingold KR, Elias PM. Relationship of epidermal lipogenesis to cutaneous barrier
function. J Lipid Res 1987; 28:746–752.
64. Menon GK, Price LF, Bommannan B, et al. Selective obliteration of the epidermal calcium gradient
leads to enhanced lamellar body secretion. Journal of Investigative Dermatology 1994; 102(5):789–795.
65. Loden M. Role of topical emollients and moisturizers in the treatment of dry skin barrier disorders.
Am J Clin Dermatol 2003; 4(11):771–788.
Role of Calcium in the Regulation of Skin Barrier Homeostasis
181

=== Page 199 ===
66. Pallon J, Malmqvist KG, Werner-Linde Y, et al. PIXE analysis of pathological skin with special
reference to psoriasis and atopic dry skin. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand) 1996; 42(1):111–118.
67. Momose A, Kudo S, Sato M, et al. Calcium ions are abnormally distributed in the skin of
haemodialysis patients with uraemic pruritus. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19(8):2061–2066.
68. Vicanova J, Boelsma E, Mommaas AM, et al. Normalization of epidermal calcium distribution profile
in reconstructed human epidermis is related to improvement of terminal differentiation and stratum
corneum barrier formation. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111(1):97–106.
69. Tanojo H, Huang X, inventors; Genepharm Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, assignee. Cosmetic and cosmeceutical
compositions for restoration of skin barrier function. US patent 7300649. 2007. Feb 8, 2006.
70. Even-Paz Z, Shani J. The Dead Sea and psoriasis. Historical and geographic background. Int J
Dermatol 1989; 28(1):1–9.
71. Proksch E, Nissen HP, Bremgartner M, et al. Bathing in a magnesium-rich Dead Sea salt solution
improves skin barrier function, enhances skin hydration, and reduces inflammation in atopic dry
skin. Int J Dermatol 2005; 44(2):151–157.
72. Augustin C, Frei V, Perrier E, et al. A skin equivalent model for cosmetological trials: an in vitro
efficacy study of a new biopeptide. Skin Pharmacol 1997; 10(2):63–70.
73. Cao G, Xu Z, Wei H, et al. [Pearl and mother-of-pearl powder in health-care]. Zhongguo Zhong Yao
Za Zhi 1996; 21(10):635–638.
74. Matz H, Orion E, Wolf R. Balneotherapy in dermatology. Dermatol Ther 2003; 16(2):132–140.
75. Heywood A. A trial of the Bath Waters: the treatment of lead poisoning. Med Hist Suppl 1990; (10):
82–101.
76. Shani J, Kushelevsky AP, Harari M, et al. Sustained decrease of blood pressure in psoriatic patients
during treatment at the Dead Sea. Pharmacol Res 1995; 31(6):355–359.
77. Yoshizawa Y, Tanojo H, Kim SJ, et al. Sea water or its components alter experimental irritant
dermatitis in man. Skin Res Technol 2001; 7(1):36–39.
78. Tanojo H, Ting W, Huang X. Application of topical formulations containing calcium in mineral
complex to enhance skin barrier regeneration. In: American Academy of Dermatology Summer
Meeting; 2006; San Diego, CA; 2006. p P800.
182
Tanojo et al.

=== Page 200 ===
17
Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers:
An Overviewa
Haw-Yueh Thong, Hongbo Zhai, and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Skin is an optimal interface for systemic drug administration. Transdermal drug delivery
(TDD) is the controlled release of drugs through intact and/or altered skin to obtain
therapeutic levels systematically and to affect specified targets for the purpose of, for example,
blood pressure control, pain management, and others. Dermal drug delivery (DDD) is similar
to TDD except that the specified target is the skin itself (1). TDD has the advantages of
bypassing gastrointestinal incompatibility and hepatic “first pass” effect; reduction of side
effects due to the optimization of the blood concentration time profile; predictable and
extended duration of activity; patient-activated/patient-modulated delivery; elimination of
multiple dosing schedules, thus enhancing patient compliance; minimization of inter- and
intrapatient variability; reversibility of drug delivery allowing the removal of drug source; and
relatively large area of application compared with the mucosal surfaces (1).
After nearly four decades of extensive study, the success of this technology remains
limited, with many problems waiting to be solved, one of which is the challenge of low skin
permeability hindering the development of TDD for macromolecules. To overcome the skin
barrier safely and reversibly while enabling the penetration of macromolecules is a
fundamental problem in the field of TDD and DDD.
Several technological advances have been made in the recent decades to overcome skin
barrier properties (2). Examples include physical means such as iontophoresis, sonophoresis,
and microneedles; chemical means such as penetration enhancers (PEs); and biochemical
means such as liposomal vesicles and enzyme inhibition.
We overview physical and biochemical means of penetration enhancement, and focus on
the common chemical PEs. We discuss the classification and mechanisms of chemical PEs, its
applications in TDD, and trends and development in penetration enhancement.
PHYSICAL PENETRATION ENHANCEMENT
Physical means of penetration enhancement mainly incorporate mechanisms to transiently
circumvent the normal barrier function of SC and to allow the passage of macromolecules.
Although the mechanisms are different, these methods share the common goal to disrupt SC
structure to create “holes” big enough for molecules to permeate. Table 1 summarizes the
commonly investigated technologies of physical penetration enhancement. Two of the better-
known technologies are iontophoresis and sonophoresis, and the holes created by these
methods are generally believed to be of nanometer dimensions, permissive of transport of
small drugs (3). A new and exciting technology for macromolecule delivery is microneedle-
enhanced delivery. Theses systems use arrays of tiny needlelike structures to create transport
pathways of microns’ dimensions, and should be able to permit transport of macromolecules,
possibly supramolecular complexes and microparticles. These systems have greatly enhanced
(up to 100,000 fold) the penetration of macromolecules through skin (4), while also offering
painless drug delivery (5,6).
aReprinted with Permission from Skin Pharmacology and Applied Skin Physiology.

=== Page 201 ===
Table 1
Physical Methods of Penetration Enhancement
Method
Definition
Mechanism(s)
Examples of drugs
Reference
Ionotophoresis
The electrical driving of charged
molecules into tissue by passing
a small direct current through a
drug-containing electrode in contact
with skin
1. Electrical repulsion from the driving
electrode drives charged molecules
Calcitonin, trans-nail delivery of salicylic acid,
transdermal delivery of peptides, proteins,
and oligonucleotides
(4,7–10)
2. The flow of electric current enhances
skin permeability
3. Electroosmosis affect uncharged
and large polar molecules
Electroporation
A method of reversibly permeabilizing
lipid bilayers by the application of
an electric pulse
Application of short (micro- to
millisecond) electrical pulses of
*100–1000 V/cm creates transient
aqueous pores in the lipid bilayers
Methotrexate, timolol, fentanyl, tetracaine,
nalbuphine, cyclosporin-A
(11–17)
Sonoporation
Ultrasound-mediated delivery of
therapeutic agents into biological
cells
1. (Low-energy frequency): disturbs
the lipid packing in SC by cavitation
Insulin, cutaneous vaccination, transdermal
heparin delivery, transdermal glucose monitoring,
delivery of acetyl cholinesterase inhibitors for the
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, treatment of
bone diseases and Peyronie’s disease and
dermal exposure assessment
(4,18,19)
2. (Shock waves): increase free volume
space in bimolecular leaflets thus
enhancing permeation
Microneedle-enhanced
delivery systems
A method using arrays of microscopic
needles to open pores in SC thus
facilitating drug permeation
Bypasses the SC and delivers drugs
directly to the skin capillaries. Also
has the advantage of being too short
to stimulate the pain fibers.
Oligonucleotide, insulin, protein vaccine, DNA
vaccine, methyl nicotinate
(3,6)
Abbreviation: SC, stratum corneum.
184
Thong et al.

=== Page 202 ===
BIOCHEMICAL PENETRATION ENHANCEMENT
Biochemical means of penetration enhancement include using prodrug molecules (20),
chemical modification (21), enzyme inhibition (22), and the usage of vesicular systems or
colloidal particles (23). Among these strategies, special formulation approaches, based mainly
on the usage of colloidal carriers, are most promising. Liposomes (phospholipids-based
artificial vesicles) and niosomes (nonionic surfactant vesicles) are widely used to enhance drug
delivery across the skin. In addition, proliposomes and proniosomes, which are converted to
liposomes and niosomes upon simple hydration are also used in TDD (24). Generally, these
colloidal carriers are not expected to penetrate into viable skin. Most reports cite a localizing
effect whereby the carriers accumulate in SC or other upper skin layers (4).
More recently, a new type of liposomes called transferosomes has been introduced (25,26).
Transferosomes consist of phospholipids, cholesterol and additional “edge activators”—
surfactant molecules such as sodium cholate. The inventors claim that 200- to 300-nm sized
transferosomes are ultradeformable and squeeze through pores less than one-tenth of their
diameter, and are thus able to penetrate intact skin. Penetration of these colloidal particles works
best under in vivo conditions and requires a hydration gradient from the skin surface toward the
viable tissues to encourage skin penetration under non-occluded conditions.
In addition, ethosomes, which are liposomes high in ethanol content (up to 45%), penetrate
skin and enhance compound delivery to deep skin strata or systematically. The mechanism
suggested is that ethanol fluidizes both ethosomal lipids and lipid bilayers in the SC, allowing
the soft, malleable vesicles to penetrate through the disorganized lipid bilayers (27).
In general, six potential mechanisms of actions of these colloidal carriers were proposed (4):
1.
Penetration of SC by a free drug process—drug releases from vesicle and then
penetrates skin independently
2.
Penetration of SC by intact liposomes
3.
Enhancement due to release of lipids from carriers and interaction with SC lipids
4.
Improved drug uptake by skin
5.
Different enhancement efficiencies control drug input
6.
The role of protein requires elaboration
CHEMICAL PENETRATION ENHANCERS
Substances that help promote drug diffusion through the stratum corneum (SC) and epidermis
are referred to as PEs, accelerants, adjuvants, or sorption promoters (28). PEs have been
extensively studied given its advantages such as design flexibility with formulation chemistry
and patch application over large area. PEs improve drug transport by reducing the resistance
of SC to drug permeation. To date, none of the existing chemical penetration enhancers (CPEs)
have proven to be ideal. In particular, the efficacy of PEs toward the delivery of high–
molecular weight drugs remains limited. Attempts to improve enhancement by increasing the
potency of enhancers inevitably lead to a compromise on safety issues. Achieving sufficient
potency without irritancy has proved challenging.
CLASSIFICATION OF CPEs
The diverse physicochemical properties and variation in mechanisms of action of compounds
investigated for their penetration enhancement effects made a simple classification scheme for PEs
difficult to set up. Hori et al. (29) proposed a conceptual diagrammatic approach based on Fujita’s
data (30) for the classification of PEs. In this approach, they determined organic and inorganic
values for PEs, and the resultant plot of organic versus inorganic characteristics grouped PEs into
distinct areas on the diagram—area I encloses enhancers, which are solvents; area II designates
PEs for hydrophilic drugs; and area III contains PEs for lipophilic compounds. On the other hand,
Lambert et al. (31) grouped most PEs into three classes: solvents and hydrogen bond acceptors
(e.g., dimethylsulfoxide, dimethylacetamide, and dimethylformamide), simple fatty acids and
alcohols, and weak surfactants containing a moderately sized polar group (e.g., Azone1,
1-dodecylazacycloheptan-2-one); whereas Pfister et al. (28) classified PEs as either polar or nonpolar.
To date, there is no consensus as to which classification to adopt. Table 2 classifies commonly
(text continues on page 191 )
Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers
185

=== Page 203 ===
Table 2
Chemical Penetration Enhancers
Category and examples
Cosolvent/vehicle
Mechanism
Examples of drugs (33)
Comment
Reference
Sulfoxides
DMSO
1. Increase lipid fluidity
2. Promote drug partitioning
DMSO: theophylline, salicylic
acid, hydrocortisone,
testosterone, scopolamine,
antimycotics, fluocinolone
acetonide, flufenamic acid
(34,35)
DCMS
Protein-DCMS interactions, resulting
in a change in protein conformation,
creating aqueous channels
DCMS: methotrexate, naloxone,
pyridostigmine bromide,
hydrocortisone, progesterone
DCMS enhance polar drug
more effectively
Alkanones
N-heptane, n-octane, n-nonane,
n-decane, n-undecane,
n-dodecane, n-tridecane,
n-tetradecane, n-hexadecane
Extensive barrier alteration of SC
Propanolol, diazepam
(36)
Alcohols
Alkanol:
E, propanol, butanol,
2-butanol, pentanol, 2-pentanol,
hexanol, octanol, nonanol,
decanol, BA
1. Low–molecular weight
alkanols (C  6) may act
as solubilizing agents
2. More hydrophobic
alkanols may extract
lipids from SCa, leading
to increased diffusion
E: tacrine, metrifonate, dichlorvos,
ketolorac, nitroglycerin,
tazifylline, betahistine,
cyclosporin A
(37–40)
Fatty alcohol:
caprylic, decyl, LA, 2-lauryl,
myristyl, cetyl, stearyl,
oleyl, linoleyl, linoleyl alcohol
LA: buprenorphine
(41)
Polyols
PG, PEG, ethylene glycol,
diethylene glycol, triethylene
glycol, dipropylene glycol, G,
propanediol, butanediol,
pentanediol, hexanetriol
43 enhancement of
diazepam and 86
enhancement of
midazolam maleate
seen in PG and 5%
Azone in a PG:ethanol:
water (2:2:1) vehicle.
PG may solvate a-keratin and
occupy hydrogen bonding sites,
reducing drug-tissue binding
PG: 5-fluorouracil, tacrine,
ketorolac, isosorbide dinitrate,
clonazapem, albuterol,
verapamil, betahistine,
estradiol, dihydroergotamine,
methotrexate, steroids,
midazolam maleate, diazepam
PEG: terbutaline
G: diazepam, terbutaline,
5-fluorouracil
Inclusion of 2% Azone or
5% oleic acid to PG
produced a more bioactive
formulation
(42,43)
186
Thong et al.

=== Page 204 ===
Table 2
Chemical Penetration Enhancers (Continued )
Category and examples
Cosolvent/vehicle
Mechanism
Examples of drugs (33)
Comment
Reference
Amides
Urea, DMA, diethyltoluamide, DMF,
dimethyloctamide,
dimethyldecamide
Urea: hydration of SC, keratolytic,
creating hydrophilic diffusion
channels
Urea: ketoprofen, 5-fluorouracil
DMA/DMF: griseofluvin,
betamethasone 17-benzoate,
caffeine
Urea analogues in PG
enhanced permeability
of 5-fluorouracil 6
(41,44)
DMA/DMF:
(low conc.): partition to keratin,
(high conc.): increase lipid fluidity,
disrupt lipid packaging
Biodegradable cyclic urea:
1-alkyl-4-imidazolin-2-one
Indomethacin
Comparable to or better
than Azone
(45)
Pyrrolidone derivatives:
1M2P,
2-pyrrolidone,
1-lauryl-2-pyrrolidone,
1-methyl-4-carboxy-2-
pyrrolidone,
1-hexyl-4-carboxy-2-
pyrrolidone,
1-lauryl-4-carboxy-2-
pyrrolidone,
1-methyl-4-methoxycarbonyl-2-
pyrrolidone,
1-hexyl-4-methoxycarbonyl-2-
pyrrolidone,
1-lauryl-4-methoxycarbonyl-2-
pyrrolidone,
NMP,
N-cyclohexylpyrrolidone,
N-dimethylaminopropylpyrrolidone,
N-cocoalkypyrrolidone,
N-tallowalkylpyrrolidone
Interact with both keratin in the SC
and with lipids in the skin
structure
1M2P: griseofulvin,
theophylline, tetracycline,
ibuprofen, betamethasone
17-benzoate
NMP: prazosin
(41,46)
Biodegradable pyrrolidone derivatives:
Fatty acid esters of
N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-pyrrolidone
(31)
(Continued )
Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers
187

=== Page 205 ===
Table 2
Chemical Penetration Enhancers (Continued )
Category and examples
Cosolvent/vehicle
Mechanism
Examples of drugs (33)
Comment
Reference
Cyclic amides:
1-dodecylazacycloheptane-
2-one(Azone),
1-geranylazacycloheptan-
2-one,
1-farnesylazacycloheptan-
2-one,
1-geranylgeranylazacyclo-
heptan-2-one,
1-(3,7-dimethyloctyl)
azacycloheptan-2-one,
1-(3,7,11-trimethyldodecyl)
azacycloheptan-2-one,
1-geranylazacyclohexane-
2-one,
1-geranylazacyclopentan-
2,5-dione,
1-farnesylazacyclopentan-
2-one
Azone: enhancer effect
can be increased by
use of a cosolvent
such as PG.
Azone:
1. Affects lipid structure of SC
2. Increases partitioning
3. Increases membrane fluidity
Azone: 5-fluorouracil,
antibiotics, glucocorticoids,
peptites, clonazepam,
albuterol, estradiol,
levonorgestrel, HIV protease
inhibitor (LB-71148),
betahistine, dihydroergotamine
Azone: significant accelerant
effects at low conc.
(1–5%), can be applied
undiluted to skin without
significant discomfort,
effective for both hydrophilic
and hydrophobic drugs
(47–49)
Hexamethylenelauramide and its
derivatives
(50)
Diethanolamine, triethanolamine
(42)
Fatty acids
Linear:
LIA, valeric, heptanoic,
pelagonic, caproic, CA,
LAA, myristic, stearic, OA,
caprylic
Branched:
isovaleric, neopentanoic,
neoheptanoic,
neononanoic, trimethyl
hexanoic, neodecanoic,
isostearic
Selective perturbation of the
intercellular lipid bilayers
OA: decreases the phase
transition temperatures of the lipid,
increasing motional freedom or
fluidity of lipids
Naloxone, mannitol,
betamethasone 17-benzoate,
hydrocortisone, acyclovir,
nitroglycerin
OA: galanthamine, estradiol,
levonorgestrel
CA: buprenorphine, albiterol
LAA: buprenorphine, betahistine
Among stearic, oleic, and
linoleic acids, maximum
enhancement was
observed with linoleic acid
(41,51,52)
188
Thong et al.

=== Page 206 ===
Table 2
Chemical Penetration Enhancers (Continued )
Category and examples
Cosolvent/vehicle
Mechanism
Examples of drugs (33)
Comment
Reference
Fatty acid esters
Aliphatic:
isopropyl n-butyrate, isopropyl
n-hexanoate,
isopropyl n-decanoate, IPM,
isopropyl palmitate,
octyldodecyl myristate
Alkyl:
EA, butyl acetate, methyl
acetate, methylvalerate,
methylpropionate,
diethyl sebacate, ethyl oleate
IPM: direct action on SC, permeating
into liposome bilayers, increasing
fluidity
Aliphatic: increase diffusivity in the SC
and/or the partition coefficient
Alkyl: increase lipid fluidity (similar to
DMSO)
IPM: galanthamine, ketorolac,
chlorpheniramine,
dexbrompheniramine,
diphenhydramine, theophylline,
pilocarpine, verapamil
EA: levonorgestrel, 17b-estradiol,
hydrocortisone, 5-fluorouracil,
nefedipine
(53,54)
Surfactants
Anionic:
sodium laurate, sodium lauryl
sulfate, sodium octyl sulfate
Alter the barrier function of SC,
allowing removal of water-soluble
agents that normally act as
plasticizers
Greater damage and
permeation enhancement
with anionic surfactants
than with nonionic
surfactants
(55,56)
Cationic:
Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide,
tetradecyltrimethylammonium
bromide, octyltrimethylammonium
bromide,
benzalkonium chloride,
octadecyltrimethylammonium
chloride, cetylpyridinium chloride,
dodecyltrimethylammonium
chloride,
hexadecyltrimethylammonium
chloride
Significant increases in
the flux of lidocaine
from saturated systems
in PG-water mixtures
Adsorb at interfaces and interact with
biological membranes, causing
damage to skin
Cationic surfactants are
more destructive to skin
than anionic surfactants.
(56–58)
zwitterionic surfactants
hexadecyl trimethyl
ammoniopropane sulfonate, oleyl
betaine, cocamidopropyl
hydroxysultaine, cocamidopropyl
betaine
(59)
Nonionics:
Polyxamer (231, 182, 184),
Polysorbate (20, 60), Brij (30, 93,
96, 99), Span (20, 40, 60, 80, 85),
Tween (20, 40, 60, 80), Myrj (45,
51, 52), Miglyol 840
Polysorbate 20 and 60
increased lidocaine
flux in the presence
of PG
Emulsify sebum, enhancing the
thermodynamic activity of
coefficients of drugs
Tween 80: ketoprofen
Polysorbate 20, 60: lidocaine
(41,60,61)
(Continued )
Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers
189

=== Page 207 ===
Table 2
Chemical Penetration Enhancers (Continued )
Category and examples
Cosolvent/vehicle
Mechanism
Examples of drugs (33)
Comment
Reference
Bile salts:
sodium cholate, sodium salts
of TC, glycolic, desoxycholic
acids
TC: elcatonin and vit. D3,
estradiol and vit. D3,
(62)
Lecithin
(63)
Terpenes
Hydrocarbons:
D-Limonene, a-pinene,
b-carene
Alcohols:
a-Terpineol, terpinen-4-ol, carvol
Ketones:
Carvone, pulegone, piperitone,
menthone
Oxides:
Cyclohexene oxide, limonene
oxide, a-pinene oxide,
cyclopentene oxide, 1,8-cineole
Oils:
Ylang ylang, anise,
chenopodium, eucalyptus
1. Increases diffusivity of drugs
within SC due to disruption of
intercellular lipid barrier
2. Opens new polar pathways
within and across the SC
5-Fluorouracil, aspirin,
haloperidol
Hydrocarbon terpenoids were
least effective, oxides
moderately effective, and the
alcohols, ketones, and cyclic
ethers most effective
accelerants of 5-fluorouracil
permeation
(36,64,65)
Organic acids
Salicylic acid and salicylates
(including their methyl, ethyl, and
propyl glycol derivatives), citric
and succinic acid
(66)
Cyclodextrins
HPbCD
DIMEB
Higher penetration of
liarzole in DIMEB
with PG/oleic acid
compared with HPbCD
Form inclusion complexes with
lipophilic drugs and increase
their solubility of in aqueous
solutions
Liarzole
(67,68)
Proprietary chemical enhancers
(69)
Alkyl-2-(N,N-disubstituted amino)-
alkanoate ester (NexAct1)
2-(n-nonyl)-1,3-dioxolane (SEPA1)
Ibuprofen, ketoprofen,
alprostadil, testoterone
aSC: stratum corneum.
Abbreviations: DMSO, dimethylsulfoxide; DCMS, decylmethylsulfoxide; BA, benzyl alcohol; LA, lauryl; PG, propylene glicol; E, ethanol; PEG, polyethylene glicol; G, glicerol; DMA,
dimethylacetamide; DMF, dimethyformamide; 1M2P, 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone; NMP, N-methyl-pyrrolidone; LIA, linoleic acid; CA, capric acid; LAA, lauric acid; OA, oleic acid; IPM, isopropyl
myristate; EA, ethyl acetate; TC, taurocholic; HPbCD, 2-hydroxypropyl-b-cyclodextrin; DIMEB, 2,6-dimethyl-b-cyclodextrin; conc., concentration; vit., vitamin.
Source: From Ref. 9.
190
Thong et al.

=== Page 208 ===
investigated PEs based on the chemical classes to which the compounds belong (32). Only
representative compounds are listed to avoid an exhaustive list. Note that a perfect
classification is yet to be developed, and the key lies in a comprehensive understanding of
the mechanisms and the physicochemical parameters of CPEs.
MECHANISM OF CPEs
The mechanisms of action proposed for commonly seen CPEs are listed in Table 2. Basically,
transdermal penetration of most drugs is a passive diffusion process (70). There are three
major potential routes for penetration—appendageal (through sweat ducts and/or hair
follicles with associated sebaceous glands), transcellular permeation through the SC, or
intercellular permeation through the SC (4). The appendageal route usually contributes
negligibly to steady-state drug flux given its small available fractional area of 0.1%. This route
may be important for short diffusional times and for ions and large polar molecules, which
have low penetration across SC. The intact SC thus comprises the predominant route through
which most molecules penetrate.
Kanikkannan et al. (71) suggested three pathways for drug penetration through the skin:
polar, nonpolar, and both. The mechanism of penetration through the polar pathway is to
cause protein conformational change or solvent swelling; whereas the key to penetrate via the
nonpolar pathway is to alter the rigidity of the lipid structure and fluidize the crystalline
pathway. Some enhancers may act on both polar and nonpolar pathways by dissolving the skin
lipids or denaturing skin proteins. On the other hand, Ogiso and Tanino (72) proposed the
following mechanisms for the enhancement effect: (i) an increase in the fluidity of the SC lipids
and reduction in the diffusional resistance to permeants, (ii) the removal of intercellular lipids
and dilation between adherent cornified cells, (iii) an increase in the thermodynamic activity of
drugs in vehicles, (iv) the exfoliation of SC cell membranes, the dissociation of adherent cornified
cells, and elimination of the barrier function.
Ogiso et al. (73) also proposed examples of PEs with different relative enhancement
capabilities due to differences in the chemical structure and other parameters. In their study,
the relative ability to enhance transdermal penetration of indomethacin into hairless rat skin
was studied. The results were summarized in Table 3 (69).
Furthermore, Kanikkannan et al. (71) proposed that on the basis of the chemical structure
of PEs (such as chain length, polarity, level of unsaturation, and presence of specific chemical
groups such as ketones), the interaction between the SC and PEs may vary, contributing to the
different mechanisms in penetration enhancement. A comprehensive understanding of the
mechanisms of action and a judicious selection of CPE would be helpful in the successful
development of TDD and DDD products.
FDA-APPROVED TDD
There has been an increased focus on the potential of TDD as evident from the increase in the
number of patents as well as scientific publications on TDD systems. Many drugs have been
evaluated for TDD in prototype patches, either in vitro permeation studies using mouse, rat, or
Table 3
Examples of Penetration Enhancers with Different Relative Enhancement Capabilities due to Differences
in the Chemical Structure and other Parameters
Mechanisms
Comparison
Extraction of intercellular lipids and dilations between
cornified cells, permitting percutaneous passage of
polar substances
1-dodecylazacycloheptane-2-one (Azone) > n-octanol >
d-limonen > oleic acid > cı´n˜elo
Increase in partitioning into skin
1-dodecylazacycloheptane-2-one > n-octanol > cineol >
d-limonen > oleic acid > isopropyl myristate >
monooleate
Increase in the fluidity of SC lipids and reduction in
diffusional resistance
1-dodecylazacycloheptane-2-one > isopropyl myristate
> monoolein > oleic acid > cineol, sodium oleate
Increase in thermodynamic activity in vehicles
n-octanol > sodium oleate > d-limonen > monoolein >
cineol > oleyl oleate > isopropyl myristate
Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers
191

=== Page 209 ===
human skin or have reached varying stages of clinical testing. Examples are listed in Table 2.
Despite a wide array of TDD systems undergoing research and development, only a small
percentage of the drugs reach the market successfully because of three limitations: difficulty of
penetration through human skin, skin irritation and allergenicity, and clinical need. In
addition, it is generally accepted that the best drug candidates for passive adhesive
transdermal patches must be nonionic; must have low molecular weight (<500 Da), adequate
solubility in oil and water (log P in the range 1–3), and a low melting point (<2008C); and must
be potent (dose <50 mg/day, and ideally <10 mg/day) (74–76). Given these operating
parameters, the number of drug candidates, which fits the criteria, may seem low.
Nevertheless, with the development of novel technologies, such constraint may be overcome.
Since the introduction of a TDD for scopolamine in 1981, several new products have been
introduced. The U.S. TDD market approached $1.2 billion in 2001 and was based on 11 drug
molecules: fentanyl, lidocaine, prilocaine, nitroglycerin, estradiol, ethinyl estradiol, norethin-
drone acetate, testosterone, clonidine, nicotine, and scopolamine (77). Barry (4) reported that
40% of drug delivery candidate products that were under clinical evaluation and 30% of those
in preclinical development in the United States were TDD or DDD systems.
Examples of Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved transdermal patches and
their applications are given in Table 4. Despite a plethora of candidate CPEs to choose from,
all currently available TDD products adopt skin occlusion as the primary mechanism for
penetration enhancement, perhaps due to its simplicity and convenience, and the following
effects on SC (78,79): an increase in SC hydration and a reservoir effect in penetration
rates of the drug due to hydration, an increase in skin temperature from 328C to 378C, and
the prevention of accidental wiping or evaporation (volatile compound) of the applied
compound.
Table 4
Examples of FDA-Approved Transdermal Patches, Their Applications, and the Mechanisms/Compounds
Used for Penetration Enhancement
Drug
Application(s)
Example of
commercially
available product(s)
Penetration enhancement
effect and PEs
Scopolamine
Motion sickness
Transderm Scop
Occlusive effect
Fentanyl
Moderate-to-severe
chronic pain
Duragesic
Occlusive effect
Lidocaine
Anesthesia
Lidoderm
Occlusive effect, urea, propylene
glycol
Prilocaine
Anesthesia
EML anesthetic disc
Occlusive effect, polyoxyethylene
fatty acid esters
Testosterone
Hormone replacement
therapy
Androderm
Occlusive effect, glycerol
monooleate
Estradiol/norethindrone
acetate
Hormone replacement
therapy
Combipatch
Occlusive effect, silicone, oleic
acid, dipropylene glycol
Estradiol
Symptomatic relief of
postmenopausal
symptoms
and prevention of
osteoporosis
Alora, Climera, Esclim,
Vivelle,
Vivelle-dot
Occlusive effect; Climera: fatty
acid esters; Vivelle:
1,3-butylene glycerol, oleic
acid, lecithin, propylene glycol,
dipropylene glycol; Vivelle-dot:
oleyl alcohol, dipropylene glycol
Norelgestromin/ethinyl
estradiol
Contraception
Ortho Evra
Occlusive effect, lauryl lactate
Nitroglycerin
Angina pectoris
Nitro-Dur, Nitrodisc,
Transderm-Nitro
Occlusive effect, fatty acid esters
Clonidine
Hypertension
Catapres-TTS
Occlusive effect
Nicotine
Smoking cessation
Nicoderm CQ
Occlusive effect
Methyphenidate
Attention deficit
hyperactive disorder
Daytrana
Occlusive effect
Selegiline
Depression
Emsam
Occlusive effect
Oxybutynin
Urge/urinary
incontinence
Oxytrol
Occlusive effect
Abbreviations: PEs, penetration enhancers; EMLA, eutectic mixture of local anesthetic.
192
Thong et al.

=== Page 210 ===
FUTURE TRENDS
The protective function of human SC imposes physicochemical limitations to the type of
molecules that can traverse the barrier. As a result, commercially available products based on
TDD or DDD have been limited. Various strategies have emerged over the last decade to
optimize delivery. Approaches such as the optimization of formulation or of drug-carrying
vehicle to increase skin permeability do not greatly improve the permeation of macro-
molecules.
On the contrary, physical or mechanical methods of enhancing delivery have been more
promising. Improved delivery has been shown for drugs of differing lipophilicity and
molecular weight, including proteins, peptides, and oligonucleotides, using electrical methods
(iontophoresis and electroporation), mechanical (abrasion, ablation, and perforation), and
other energy-related techniques such as ultrasound and needleless injection (80).
Another strategy for penetration enhancement is to exploit the synergistic effects offered
by combined techniques. Karande et al. (81) reported the discovery of synergistic combinations
of penetration enhancers (SCOPE), which allow permeation of 10-kDa macromolecules with
minimal skin irritation using high-throughput screening method. Kogan and Garti (51) also
showed that the combination of several enhancement techniques led to synergetic drug
penetration and decrease in skin toxicity. In essence, the possibilities seem endless in the field
of TDD and DDD.
CONCLUSION
TDD would avoid problems associated with the oral route as well as the inconvenience and
pain associated with needle delivery and has thus competed with oral and injection therapy for
the accolade of the innovative research area for drug delivery. Yet there remains a paucity of
candidates for TDD or DDD to be marketed. The reasons are twofold: (i) most candidate drug
molecules have low permeation rates through the skin to ever reach clinically satisfactory
plasma level; (ii) risk of skin irritation and allergic contact dermatitis may be increased by skin
occlusion (79,82) and/or the application of potent PEs (81). The ideal characteristics of PEs
include the following (28):
l Be both pharmacologically and chemically inert
l Be chemically stable
l A high degree of potency with specific activity, rapid onset, predictable duration of
activity, and reversible effects on skin properties
l Show chemical and physical compatibility with formulation and system components
l Be nonirritant, nonallergenic, nonphototoxic, and noncomedogenic
l Be odorless, tasteless, colorless, cosmetically acceptable, and inexpensive
l Be readily formulated into dermatological preparations, transdermal patches, and skin
adhesives
l Have a solubility parameter approximating that of skin (83)
Future studies on the mechanisms of penetration enhancement, the metabolic processes
of chemicals within the skin, skin toxicity, as well as the development of novel technologies
will improve our knowledge on penetration enhancement. While the current TDD and DDD
technologies still offer significant potential for growth, next-generation technologies will
enable a much broader application of TDD to the biopharmaceutical industry.
REFERENCES
1. Kydonieus AF, Wille JJ, Murphy GF. Fundamental concepts in transdermal delivery of drugs. In:
Kydonieus AF, Wille JJ, eds. Biochemical Modulation of Skin Reactions. Transdermals, Topicals,
Cosmetics. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Inc, 2000.
2. Smith EW, Maibach HI. Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Inc,
2005.
3. Prausnitz MR. Microneedles for transdermal drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2004; 56:581–587.
Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers
193

=== Page 211 ===
4. Barry BW. Novel mechanisms and devices to enable successful transdermal drug delivery. Eur
J Pharm Sci 2001; 14:101–104.
5. Kaushik S, Hord AH, Denson DD, et al. Lack of pain associated with microfabricated microneedles.
Anesth Analg 2001; 92:502–504.
6. Sivamani RK, Stoeber B, Wu GC, et al. Clinical microneedle injection of methyl nicotinate: stratum
corneum penetration. Skin Res Technol 2005; 11:152–156.
7. Santi P, Colombo P, Bettini R, et al. Drug reservoir composition and transport of salmon calcitonin in
transdermal iontophoresis. Pharm Res 1997; 14(1):63–66.
8. Narasimha Murthy S, Wiskirchen DE, Paul Bowers C. Iontophoretic drug delivery across human nail.
J Pharm Sci 2007; 96(2):305–311;[Epub ahead of print].
9. Miller LL, Kolaskie CJ, Smith GA, et al. Transdermal iontophoresis of gonadotropin releasing
hormone and two analogues. J Pharm Sci 1990; 79:490–493.
10. Mitragotri S, Edwards D, Blankschtein D, et al. A mechanistic study of ultrasonically enhanced
transdermal drug delivery. J Pharm Sci 1995; 84:697–706.
11. Wong TW, Zhao YL, Sen A, et al. Pilot study of topical delivery of methotrexate by electroporation.
Br J Dermatol 2005; 152(3):524–530.
12. Denet AR, Preat V. Transdermal delivery of timolol by electroporation through human skin. J Control
Release 2003; 88(2):253–262.
13. Hu Q, Liang W, Bao J, et al. Enhanced transdermal delivery of tetracaine by electroporation. Int
J Pharm 2000; 202(1–2):121–124.
14. Sung KC, Fang JY, Wang JJ, et al. Transdermal delivery of nalbuphine and its prodrugs by
electroporation. Eur J Pharm Sci 2003; 18(1):63–70.
15. Vanbever R, LeBoulenge E, Preat V. Transdermal delivery of fentanyl by electroporation. I. Influence
of electrical factors. Pharm Res 1996; 13(4):559–565.
16. Vanbever R, Morre ND, Preat V. Transdermal delivery of fentanyl by electroporation. II. Mechanisms
involved in drug transport. Pharm Res 1996; 13(9):1360–1366.
17. Wang S, Kara M, Krishnan TR. Transdermal delivery of cyclosporin-A using electroporation.
J Control Release 1998; 50(1–3):61–70.
18. Boucaud A, Garrigue MA, Machet L, et al. Effect of sonication parameters on transdermal delivery of
insulin to hairless rats. J Control Release 2002; 81(1–2):113–119.
19. Vranic E. Sonophoresis-mechanisms and application. Bosn J Basic Med Sci 2004; 4(2):25–32.
20. Sloan KB, Bodor N. Hydroxymethyl and acyloxymethyl prodrugs of theophylline: enhanced delivery
of polar drugs through skin. Int J Pharm 1982; 12:299.
21. Choi HK, Flynn GL, Amidon GL. Transdermal delivery of bioactive peptides: the effect of
N-decylmethyl sulfoxide, pH and inhibitor on enkephalin metabolism and transport. Pharm Res 1990;
7:1099.
22. Morimoto K, Iwakura Y, Miyazaki M, et al. Effects of proteolytic enzyme inhibitors on enhancement
of transdermal iontophoretic delivery of vasopressin and analogue in rats. Int J Pharm 1992; 81:119.
23. Mezei M, Gulasekharam V. Liposomes-a selective drug delivery system for the topical route of
administration. I. Lotion dosage form. Life Sci 1980; 26:1473.
24. Choi MJ, Maibach HI. Liposomes and Niosomes as topical drug delivery systems. Skin Pharmacol
Physiol 2005; 18:209–219.
25. Planas MD, Gonzalez P, Rodriquez L, et al. Noninvasive percutaneous induction of topical analgesia
by a new type of drug carrier and prolongation of local pain insensitivity by anesthetic liposomes.
Anesth Analg 1992; 75:615–621.
26. Cevc G. Transfersomes, liposomes and other lipid suspensions on the skin: permeation enhancement,
vesicle penetration, and transdermal drug delivery. Crit Rev Ther Drug Career Syst 1996; 13:257–388.
27. Touiton, E, Dayan N, Bergelson L, et al. Ethasomes-novel vesicular carriers for enhanced delivery:
characterization and skin penetration properties. J Control Rel 2000; 65:403–418.
28. Pfister WR, Dean S, Hsieh ST. Permeation enhancers compatible with transdermal drug delivery
systems. I. Selection and formulation considerations. Pharm Tech 1990; 8:132.
29. Hori M, Satoh S, Maibach HI. Classification of penetration enhancers: a conceptual diagram. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1990; 42:71.
30. Fujita A. Prediction of organic compounds by a conceptual diagram. Chem Pharm Bull 1954; 2:163.
31. Lambert WJ, Kudlar RJ, Hollard J, et al. A biodegradable transdermal penetration enhancer based on
N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-pyrrolidone. I. Synthesis and characterization. Int J Pharm 1993; 45:181.
32. Barry BW. Penetration enhancer classification. In: Smith EW, Maibach HI, eds. Percutaneous
Penetration Enhancers.CRC Press, Inc, 1995.
33. Ghosh TK, Pfister WR. Chapter 1: an overview and future trends. In: Ghosh TK, Pfister WR, eds. Yum
Su: Transdermal and Topical Delivery Systems.Bufalo Grove, Illinois: Interpharm Press, Inc. 1997.
34. Scheuplein RJ, Blank IH. Permeability of the skin. Physio Rev 1971; 51:702.
35. Sekura DL, Scala J. The percutaneous absorption of alkyl methylsulfoxides. Adv Biol Skin 1988;
12:257.
194
Thong et al.

=== Page 212 ===
36. Hori M, Satoh S, Maibach HI, et al. Enhancement of propranolol hydrochloride and diazepam skin
absorption in vitro: effect of enhancer lipophilicity. J Pharm Sci 1991; 80:32.
37. Tsuzuki N, Wong O, Higuchi T. Effect of primary alcohols on percutaneous absorption. Int J Pharm
1988; 46:19.
38. Friend D, Catz P, Heller J, et al. Transdermal delivery of levonogestrel. 1. Alkanols as permeation
enhancers in vitro. J Control Release 1988; 7:243.
39. Ding BY, Fu XC, Liang WQ. Branched-chain alkanols as skin permeation enhancers: quantitative
structure-activity relationships. Pharmazie 2006; 61(4):298–300.
40. Liu H, Li S, Wang Y, et al. Effect of vehicles and enhancers on the topical delivery of cyclosporin A. Int
J Pharm 2006; 311(1–2):182–186.
41. Aungst BJ, Rogers NJ, Shefter E. Enhancement of naloxone penetration through human skin in vitro
using fatty acids, fatty alcohols, surfactants, sulfoxides and amines. Int J Pharm 1986; 33:225.
42. Mollgaard B, Hoelgaard A. Permeation of estradiol through the skin—effect of vehicles. Int J Pharm
1983; 15:185.
43. Herai H, Gratieri T, Thomazine JA, et al. Doxorubicin skin penetration from monoolein-containing
propylene glycol formulations. Int J Pharm 2007; 329(1–2):88–93. (Epub 2006 Aug 24).
44. Feldman RJ, Maibach HI. Percutaneous penetration. Arch Dermatol 1974; 109:58.
45. Wong O, Huntington J, Konishi R, et al. Unsaturated cyclic ureas as new non-toxic biodegradable
penetration transdermal penetration enhancers. I Synthesis. J Pharm Sci 1988; 77:967.
46. Sasaki H, Kojima M, Mori Y, et al. Enhancing effects of pyrrolidone derivatives on the transdermal
penetration of 5-fluorouracil, triamcinolone acetonide, indomethacin and flurbiprofen. J Pharm Sci
1991; 80:533.
47. Stoughton RB, McClure WD. Azone: a new non-toxic enhancer of percutaneous penetration. Drug
Dev Ind Pharm 1983; 9:725.
48. Okamoto H, Hashida M, Sezaki H. Structure-activity relationship of 1-alkyl or 1-alkenylazacycloal-
kanone derivatives as percutaneous penetration enhancers. J Pharm Sci 1988; 77:418.
49. Zhou X, Xu J, Yao K, et al. Interaction of 1-dodecyl-azacycloheptan-2-one with mouse stratum
corneum. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 2005; 16(5):563–574.
50. Mirejovsky D, Takruri H. Dermal penetration enhancement profile of hexamethylenelauramide and
its homologues: in vitro versus in vivo behaviour of enhancers in the penetration of hydrocortisone.
J Pharm Sci 1986; 75:1089.
51. Kogan A, Garti N. Microemulsions as transdermal drug delivery vehicles. Adv Colloid Interface Sci
2006; 123–126:369–385.
52. Aungst BJ. Structure/effect studies of fatty acid isomers as skin penetration enhancers and skin
irritants. Pharm Res 1989; 6:244.
53. Sato K, Sugibayashi K, Morimoto Y. Effect and mode of action of aliphatic esters on in vitro skin
permeation of nicorandil. Int J Pharm 1988; 43:31.
54. Friend D, Catz P, Heller J, et al. Simple alkyl esters as skin permeation enhancers. J Control Release
1989; 9:33.
55. Chowhan ZT, Pritchard R. Effect of surfactants on the percutaneous absorption of naproxen.
I. Comparison of rabbit, rat and human excised skin. J Pharm Sci 1978; 67:1272.
56. Gershbein LL. Percutaneous toxicity of thioglycate mixtures in rabbits. J Pharm Sci 1979; 68:1230.
57. Aoyagi T, Terashima O, Suzuki N, et al. Polymerization of benzalkonium chloride type monomers
and application to percutaneous drug absorption enhancers. J Control Release 1990; 13:63.
58. Tan EL, Liu JC, Chien YW. Effect of cationic surfactants on the transdermal permeation of ionized
indomethacin. Drug Dev Ind Pharm 1993; 19:685.
59. Zhang R, Somasundaran P. Advances in adsorption of surfactants and their mixtures at solid/
solution interfaces. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2006; 123–126:213–229.
60. Shen WW, Danti AG, Bruscato FN. Effect of nonionic surfactants on percutaneous absorption of
salicylic acid and sodium salicylate in the presence of dimethylsulfoxide. J Pharm Sci 1976; 65:1780.
61. Mahajour M, Mauser BK, Rashibaigi ZA, et al. Effect of propylene glycol diesters of caprylic and
capric acids (Miglyol 840) and ethanol binary systems on in vitro skin permeation of drugs. Int J
Pharm 1993; 95:161.
62. Carelli V, Colo DG, Nannipieri E, et al. Bile acids as enhancers of steroid penetration through excised
hairless mouse skin. Int J Pharm 1993; 89:81.
63. Kato A, Ishibashi Y, Miyake Y. Effect of egg yolk on transdermal delivery of bunazosin hydrochloride.
J Pharm Pharmacol 1987; 39:399.
64. Williams AC, Barry BW. Terpenes and the lipid-protein-partitioning theory of skin penetration
enhancement. Pharm Res 1991; 8:17.
65. Lim PF, Liu XY, Kang L, et al. Limonene GP1/PG organogel as a vehicle in transdermal delivery of
haloperidol. Int J Pharm 2006; 311(1–2):157–164.
66. Sugibayashi K, Nemoto M, Morimoto Y. Effect of several penetration enhancers on the percutaneous
absorption of indomethacin in hairless rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1988; 36:1519.
Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers
195

=== Page 213 ===
67. Frijlink HW, Schoonen AJM, Lerk CF. The effect of cyclodextrins on drug absorption. I. In vitro
observations. J Pharm Sci 1976; 65:709.
68. Uekama K, Otagiri M, Sakai A, et al. Improvement in the percutaneous absorption of beclomethasone
dipropionate by gamma-cyclodextrin complexation. J Pharm Pharmacol 1985; 37:532.
69. Chan Thomas CK. Percutaneous penetration enhancers: An Update. Excerpted from the proceedings
of the 9th Biennial International Conference of Perspectives in Percutaneous Penetration, La Grand
Motte, France, April 13, 2004; published January, 2005.
70. Hsieh DS. Understanding permeation enhancement technologies. In: Hsieh DS, ed. Drug Permeation
Enhancement: Theory and Applications. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1994.
71. Kanikkannan N, Kandimalla K, Lamba SS, et al. Structure-activity relationship of chemical
penetration enhancers in transdermal drug delivery. Curr Med Chem 2000; 7(6):593–608.
72. Ogiso T, Tanino T. Transdermal delivery of drugs and enhancement of percutaneous absorption.
Yakugaku Zasshi 2000; 120(4):328–338.
73. Ogiso T, Iwaki M, Paku T. Effect of various enhancers on transdermal penetration of indomethacin
and urea, and relationship between penetration parameters and enhancement factors. J Pharm Sci
1995; 84(4):482–488.
74. Finnin BC, Morgan TM. Transdermal penetration enhancers: applications, limitations, and potential.
J Pharm Sci 1999; 88(10):955–958.
75. Guy RH. Current status and future prospects of transdermal drug delivery. Pharm Res 1996; 13(12):
1765–1769.
76. Hadgraft J, Pugh WJ. The selection and design of topical and transdermal agents: a review. J Inv Derm
Symp Proc 1998; 3(2):131–135.
77. Retail and Provider Perspective. IMS Health, 2001.
78. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Effects of skin occlusion on percutaneous absorption: an overview. Skin
Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2001; 14(1):1–10.
79. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Occlusion vs. skin barrier function. Skin Res Technol 2002; 8:1–6.
80. Brown MB, Martin GP, Jones SA, et al. Dermal and transdermal drug delivery systems: current and
future prospects. Drug Deliv 2006; 13(3):175–187.
81. Karande P, Jain A, Mitragotri S. Discovery of transdermal penetration enhancers by high-throughput
screening. Nat Biotechnol 2004; 22(2):192–197.
82. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Skin occlusion and irritant and allergic contact dermatitis: an overview. Contact
Dermatitis 2001; 44:201–206.
83. Sloan KB, Siver, KG, Koch SAM. The effect of vehicle on the diffusion of salicylic acid through hairless
mouse skin. J Pharm Sci 1986; 75:744.
196
Thong et al.

=== Page 214 ===
18
Tests for Skin Protection: Barrier Effect
Heidi P. Chan, Hongbo Zhai, and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
One important skin function is protecting us from environmental toxicity. This is evident in
certain occupations where there is constant exposure to hazardous substances. Precautionary
measures such as glove use minimizes the risk of incurring contact dermatitis (CD), though at
times the gloves themselves may cause this skin disease. Barrier creams (BCs) may play an
important role in the prevention of CD (1–6), and various in vitro and in vivo methods have
been developed to evaluate their efficacy. In practice, their utilization remains the subject of a
lively debate; some suggest that the inappropriate BC application may exacerbate rather than
prevent irritation (1–3,6–9). The accuracy of measurements depends on the use of appropriate
methodology.
This chapter provides the investigative details of pertinent scientific literature and
summarizes methodology and efficacy of BC.
IN VITRO METHODS
In 1946, Sadler and Marriott (10) introduced facile tests to evaluate the efficiency of BC. One
method used the fluorescence of a dyestuff and eosin as an indicator to measure penetration
and the rates of penetration of water through BC; this is rapid and simple, but provides only a
qualitative estimate.
Suskind (11) performed a simple method to measure the relative efficacy or repellency of
several formulations with film immersion test in a specific exposure. Formulation containing
52.5% silicone in bentonite and 30% silicone in petrolatum were effective against a range of
aqueous irritants and sensitizers.
Langford (12) conducted in vitro studies to determine that the efficacy of the formulated
fluorochemical (FC)-resin complex included solvent penetration through treated filter paper,
solvent repellency on treated pigskin, and penetration of radio-tagged sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS)
through treated hairless mouse skin. He also conducted an in vivo study on 75 persons who had
previously experienced irritation on their hands because of continued contact with solvents.
Eighty-three percent of the panelists stated the cream was effective in protecting their hands.
Reiner et al. (13) examined the protective effect of ointments on guinea pig skin in vitro
and in vivo. The permeation values of a toxic agent through unprotected and protected skin
within 10 hours as a function of time was determined radiologically and enzymatically.
Permeation of the toxic agent was markedly reduced by polyethylene glycol ointment base and
ointments containing active substance. In in vivo experiments on guinea pigs, mortality was
greater after applying the toxic agent to unprotected skin. All formulations with nucleophilic
substances markedly reduced the mortality rate.
Loden (14) evaluated the effect of BC on the absorption of (3H) water (14C)-benzene and
(14C)-formaldehyde into excised human skin. The control and the BC-treated skins were
exposed to the test substance for 30 minutes, whereupon absorption was determined. The
experimental “water barrier” cream reduced the absorption of water and benzene, but not
formaldehyde. One cream slightly reduced benzene and formaldehyde absorption. Two other
creams did not affect the absorption of the substances studied.
Treffel et al. (15) measured in vitro on human skin the effectiveness of BC against three
dyes (eosin, methylviolet, and oil red O) with varying n-octanol/water partition coefficients
(0.19, 29.8, and 165, respectively). BC efficacy was assayed by measurements of the dyes in the
epidermis of protected skin samples after 30 minutes’ application. The efficacy of BC against
the three dyes showed in several cases data contrary to manufacturer’s information. There was

=== Page 215 ===
no correlation between the galenic parameters of the assayed products and the protection level,
indicating that neither the water content nor the consistency of the formulations influenced the
protection effectiveness.
Fullerton and Menne (16) tested the protective effect of various ethylenediaminete-
traacetate (EDTA) barrier gels against nickel contact allergy using in vitro and in vivo methods.
In an in vitro study, about 30 mg of barrier gel was applied on the epidermal side of the skin,
and a nickel disc was placed above the gel. After 24-hour application, the nickel disc was
removed and the epidermis separated from the dermis. Nickel content in epidermis and
dermis was quantified by adsorption differential pulse voltametry (ADPV). The amount of
nickel in the epidermal skin layer on barrier gel–treated skin samples was significantly
reduced compared with the untreated control. In vivo patch testing of nickel-sensitive patients
was performed using nickel discs with and without barrier gels. Test preparations and nickel
discs were removed one day post application, and the test sites were evaluated. Reduction in
positive test reactions was highly significant on barrier gel–treated sites.
Zhai et al. (17) used an in vitro diffusion system to measure the protective effect of
quaternium-18 bentonite (Q18B) gels to prevent 1% concentration of [35S] SLS penetration by
human cadaver skin. The accumulated amount of [35S]-SLS in receptor cell fluid was measured
to evaluate the efficacy of the Q-18B gels over a 24-hour period. These test gels significantly
decreased SLS absorption when compared with the unprotected skin control samples. The
percentages of protection effect of three test gels against SLS percutaneous absorption were
88%, 81% and 65%, respectively.
IN VIVO METHODS
Schwartz et al. (18) introduced an in vivo method to evaluate the efficacy of a vanishing cream
against poison ivy extract using visual erythema on human skin. The test cream was an
effective prophylaxis against poison ivy dermatitis as compared to unprotected skin.
Lupulescu and Birmingham (19) observed the ultrastructural and relief changes of
human epidermis following exposure to a protective gel and acetone and kerosene on humans.
Unprotected skin showed cell damage and a disorganized pattern in the upper layers of
epidermis. Protective agent prior to solvent exposure substantially reduced the ultrastructural
and relief changes of epidermis cells.
Lachapelle et al. (3,20–23) used a guinea pig model to evaluate the protective value of BC
and/or gels by laser Doppler flowmetry and histological assessment. The histopathological
damage after 10 minutes of contact with toluene was mostly confined to the epidermis, while
the dermis was almost normal. The dermal blood flow changes were relatively high on the
control site compared with the gel-pretreated sites.
Frosch et al. (1,8,9,24,25) developed the repetitive irritation test (RIT) in the guinea pig
and in humans to evaluate the efficacy of BC using bioengineering techniques. The cream-
pretreated and untreated test skin (guinea pig or humans) were exposed daily to the irritants
for two weeks. The resulting irritation was scored on a clinical scale and assessed by
biophysical techniques’ parameters. Some test creams suppressed irritation with all test
parameters; some failed to show such an effect or even exacerbated (9).
Zhai (2) used an in vivo human model to measure the effectiveness of BC against dye
indicator solutions: methylene blue in water and oil red O in ethanol, representative of model
hydrophilic and lipophilic compounds. Solutions of 5% methylene blue and 5% oil red O were
applied to untreated and BC-pretreated skin with the aid of aluminum occlusive chambers for
zero and four hours. At the end of the application time, the materials were removed, and
consecutive skin surface biopsies (SSBs) obtained. The amount of dye penetrating into each
strip was determined by colorimetry. Two creams exhibited effectiveness, but one cream
enhanced cumulative amount of dye.
Zhai et al. (5) introduced a facile approach to screening protectants in vivo in human
subjects. Two acute irritants and one allergen were selected: SLS representative of irritant
household and occupational CD, the combination of ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) and
urea to simulate diaper dermatitis, and Rhus to evaluate the effect of model-protective
materials. Test materials were spread over onto the test area, massaged, allowed to dry for
198
Chan et al.

=== Page 216 ===
30 minutes, and reapplied with another 30-minute drying period. The model irritants and
allergen were applied with an occlusive patch for 24 hours. Inflammation was scored with an
expanded 10-point scale at 72 hours post application. Most test materials statistically
suppressed the SLS irritation and Rhus allergic reaction and not NH4OH- and urea-induced
irritation.
Wigger-Alberti et al. (26) determined which areas of the hands were likely to be skipped
on self-application of BC by fluorescence technique at workplace. Results showed that the
application of BC was incomplete, especially on the dorsal aspects of the hands.
Draelos (27) conducted a randomized, double-blind, split-body study in 80 men, women,
and children (neonate–80 years) with the following dermatological conditions: household
dermatitis (21), occupational hand dermatitis (18), latex glove irritant CD (9), diaper dermatitis
(5), cutaneous wounds (17), and allergic CD (10). The subjects were given two identical jars
(1 jar containing petrolatum-based cream, and the other contained hydrogel-based barrier/
repair cream) and were instructed to apply one cream to half of their bodies, while the other
cream to the other half for four weeks. Results showed that 62% of the subjects preferred
hydrogel-based barrier/repair cream over the petrolatum-based cream ( p  0.005) as well as
the investigator’s assessment ( p  0.00001) in terms of the overall skin appearance.
McCormick et al. (28) performed a double-blind, randomized trial comparing a novel BC
versus an oil-containing lotion in 54 health care workers for two months. Results showed that
both creams substantially protected the health care workers against drying and chemical
irritation, preventing skin breakdown and promoting more frequent hand washing.
The skin protection efficacy of dexapanthenol was investigated by Biro et al. (29) in
a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study design in 25 healthy volunteers
(18–45 years). They compared a cream containing 5% dexapanthenol with its vehicle-
moisturizing base and applied to the flexor forearms twice daily for 26 days—one arm treated
by the test product, while the other treated with placebo. In days 15 to 25, 2% SLS was
applied on both forearms. Measures of skin physiology included sebumetry, corneometry,
pH values, and clinical appearance (photographs). Results showed, though not significantly, a
decreasing trend of the pH values and sebum content during SLS treatment but normalized
when SLS was discontinued. Hydration of the stratum corneum remained stable throughout
the study in the dexapanthenol group, while corneometry for the placebo group showed a
significant ( p < 0.05) decrease at the end of the SLS treatment on day 23. This study
demonstrates the capability of dexapanthenol to protect skin from experimentally induced
skin irritation.
Perrenoud et al. (30) conducted a double-blind crossover study comparing a new
registered BC containing 5% aluminum chlorhydrate as active ingredient with its vehicle in
21 apprentice hairdressers who are frequently exposed to repeated shampooing and hair care
products for a period of two months. The subjects were randomly assigned two groups; then,
each subject was given identical 50-g tubes at the onset of the study, after two weeks, and at the
start of the second phase. The contents of the tubes were unknown to the investigators and
subjects. The participants recorded their daily comments. Evaluation of the creams’ efficacy
included: (i) clinical scores (dryness, redness, and breaks rated as 0 ¼ none3 ¼ maximum)
assessed by the researchers; (ii) biometric measurements using evaporimetry, corneometry,
and chromametry; and (iii) recording of subjective opinions. Result for clinical evaluation
showed low scores—nearly everyone had a “0” or “1” score. Only corneometric values showed
a significant difference, i.e., the scores for the control group were significantly ( p < 0.01) higher
than the test product.
De Paepe et al. (31) investigated the beneficial effects of a skin tolerancetested
moisturizing cream on the barrier function in experimentally elicited irritant and allergic CD in
24 white female volunteers. Skin compatibility tests with the raw cosmetic materials and the
final test product were initially performed in a large population to verify that the test product
was well tolerated. Irritant CD was elicited using 1.25% SLS patch tested for 24 hours on the
volar forearms of 12 white female volunteers in two sites (1 site for treatment with the test
cream, while the other site left untreated). A third site was patch tested with filter paper
soaked in pure water. Following patch removal, the forearms were washed, and application of
0.03-mL test cream was initiated the next day, twice daily for 14 consecutive days. There was a
significant ( p < 0.05) decrease in transepidermal water loss (TEWL) values of the treated site
Tests for Skin Protection: Barrier Effect
199

=== Page 217 ===
on days 3, 8, and 15 as compared with the untreated site. Allergic CD was elicited using
nickel-mediated contact allergy patch (CAP) test in another 12 white female volunteers with
well-established histories of nickel (Ni)-contact allergies. Two patches contained 0.3 mL of
5% nickel sulfate in petrolatum and a third patch contained 0.3 mL of physiological serum
(0.9% NaCl) to serve as control. Patches were removed after 48 hours, and test sites were
cleaned with dry tissue, then 0.3 mL of the test cream was applied on the test sites twice a day
for four consecutive days. Results revealed a significant ( p < 0.05) decrease in TEWL values of
the treated site when compared with the untreated site on days 3, 8, and 15.
Diepgen et al. (32) investigated six skin care products (Locobase1 Pro cream, Debba1
Wet, Taktosan1, Pluctect1 Dual, Locobase1 fatty cream, and Kerodex1 71) for their
compatibility with normal and diseased skin, as well as their efficacy as protective skin
barriers in 40 healthy volunteers in a double-blind study. The chamber scarification test (33)
was used to compare the test products with known positive (aqueous SLS 0.5%) and negative
(paraffin oil) controls and to rank the irritancy potential of products in 20 healthy volunteers.
Approximately 0.1 mL of each product was applied to the scarified normal skin of the flexor
forearms of the participants using Finn Chambers1. Patches were removed after 23 hours
(day 1) and read an hour later and immediately before reapplication of the samples for days 2
and 3. Reactions were scored visually using a 5-point scale (“0” ¼ no reaction to “4” ¼
confluent, severe redness with edema or bullae). Results revealed that out of the eight samples
applied, Debba Wet had the highest sum of scores (“12”) in five subjects, while positive control
only reached a maximum score of “10” in three subjects. Both Debba Wet and SLS 0.5% were
considerably more irritating ( p < 0.0001, x2 ¼ 87, df ¼ 7) than the other test products.
The ranking of the test products were: Debba Wet (score average ¼ 11)  aqueous SLS 0.5%
(score average ¼ 7.4)  Taktosan cream (score average ¼ 3.7)  Locobase fatty cream (score
average ¼ 3.3)  Kerodex 71, Pluctect Dual, Locobase Pro cream, and paraffin oil (score
average ¼ 2.23.0). On the other hand, the short-time repeated exposure occlusive irritation
test (ROIT) was used to assess the efficacy of the six products and yellow Vaseline1 as
protective skin barriers in another 20 healthy volunteers. ROIT involved multiple short
application times using low concentration of irritants. Aqueous SLS 0.5% was used as the
irritant and was patch tested using Large Finn Chambers on the volar forearms of the subjects.
For each site, the following were applied: irritant alone and water alone; one site was left blank,
while the rest of the sites were first pretreated with the seven test creams 10 minutes before
irritant application. The placing of the test products was changed from person to person
according to a rotation system. The whole procedure was done every 3 to 3.5 hours for three
consecutive days. Parameters used were TEWL (measured by Tewameter1 TM 210), erythema
(measured by ChromaMeter1 CR 300), and clinical visual scoring (numerical scale: “0” ¼ no
reaction to “3” ¼ pronounced erythema and edema, extensive scaling, possibly vesicles, bullae,
pustules, and/or pronounced crusting). The comparison of the differential TEWL values
between the test areas and the untreated sites showed significantly ( p < 0.05) increased values
for Vaseline, Taktosan, and Debba Wet. There was no significant difference among the TEWL
values for Locobase Pro Cream, Plutect Dual, Locobase fatty cream, and Kerodex 71 when
compared to normal skin. The increase in TEWL values was not significant ( p > 0.05) between
SLS-exposed sites and pretreated sites. Clinically, treatment with the SLS increased the visual
scores. Likewise, Vaseline, Taktosan, and Debba Wet did not offer protection from skin
irritation.
Modak et al. (33) demonstrated that the use of topical formulation with zinc gel delayed
or prevented latex sensitivity in 22 volunteers known to have mild-to-moderate latex
intolerance. Three centiliters of both zinc gel formulation and placebo creams were applied to
the subjects divided into three groups: group A (zinc gel formulation applied on the right
hand and placebo cream on the left hand in 10 subjects who used powdered latex gloves);
group B (no cream on the right hand and zinc gel formulation on the left hand in another
10 subjects who used powdered latex gloves); and group C (no cream on the right hand and
zinc gel formulation on the left hand in 2 volunteers who used powder-free latex gloves).
Latex gloves were then worn by the subjects until they perceived discomfort or until three to
four hours had passed without symptoms. Investigators rated the subjects using numerical
scale: “0” ¼ no visible reaction to “3” ¼ severe itching, redness, and papules all over the hand
within 30 minutes. Results showed that zinc gel formulation protected 21 out of 22 volunteers
200
Chan et al.

=== Page 218 ===
from latex sensitivity. Only one subject had a score of “1” belonging to group A.
Additionally, the investigators extracted latex proteins from the gloves and treated with
zinc gel formulation diluted in distilled water. Results revealed that zinc gel formulation–
treated latex proteins decreased (mean ¼ 0.28) as compared with the untreated ones (mean ¼
1.14) by *74%. Lastly, zinc gel formulation was compared with three other creams and a
control (no cream applied) to evaluate its barrier efficacy. Zinc gel formulation proved
superior among the three creams.
IN VITRO AND IN VIVO METHODS
Teichmann et al. (34) investigated the reservoir and barrier functions of the skin in two study
designs because the former function is dependent on the latter function. Study design A was
carried out in six healthy volunteers according to the method described by Teichman (35) and
in pigskin to quantify stratum corneum penetration. Patent Blue V (C54H26CaN4O14S4) in water
(the penetrant) was applied to the human skin in increasing amounts—10 and 40 mg/cm2 of the
0.5% concentration and 40 mg/cm2 of the 2% concentration. After one hour, substances were
wiped to avoid occlusion, and then tape stripping was performed on the fifth hour. Results for
the 10 mg/cm2 of the 0.5% concentration revealed that the amount of stratum corneum
extracted was 5.10  1.25 mg/cm2—no penetrant was recovered, i.e., no excess amount
developed. However, after the applications of 40 mg/cm2 of the 0.5% concentration and
40 mg/cm2 of the 2% concentration (21.5  1.0 mg/cm2 and 27.7  1.5 mg/cm2 of extracted
stratum corneum, respectively), excess amounts of penetrants were recovered (6.7  2.8 mg/cm2
and 27.7  1.5 mg/cm2, respectively). The same procedure was performed on the porcine skin to
obtain a histological diagnosis and showed that a large amount of Patent Blue V was located on
the skin surface and the upper parts of the stratum corneum, and greater amounts were also
found in the furrows.
Study B was performed in another six healthy volunteers and the three BCs—commercial
BC, beeswax, Vaseline—were investigated using the penetration behavior of Patent Blue V in
water in the different BC-pretreated skin, and one untreated site by tape stripping. Results
revealed that the commercial BC did not demonstrate barrier function—similar to the
untreated site ( p > 0.05), while beeswax and Vaseline were significant ( p < 0.05) in their
efficacy of barrier function.
Chilcott et al. (36) conducted an in vivo and in vitro study evaluating the efficacy of a
BC (70% w/w FomblinTM HC/R and 30% w/w lubricant grade polytetrafluoroethylene)
versus chemical warfare agent in domestic white pigs. The in vivo study involved 18 pigs,
prepared as previously described (37), and divided into three groups: control group (no
agent, no BC), positive control group (with agent, no BC), and pretreated group (application
of agent 15 minutes post application of the BC). An amount of 40 mL of the BC and 14C-VX
(*6-hour 2LD50) was applied over the inner ear of the animals. Indicators of mortality
included a decrease in serum acetylcholinesterase (AchE) and a large pupil diameter.
Animals in the control and BC-treated groups survived the three-hour exposure period,
while five of the six animals in the positive control group died after a mean time of 65 
13 minutes. Correspondingly, there was a significant ( p < 0.05) decline in serum AchE, while
there was no significant ( p > 0.05) change in pupil diameter. On the other hand, the in vitro
study involved the contralateral (unexposed) ears of the postmortem pigs from the in vivo
study. Twelve pigskins were placed in Franz-type glass diffusion cells filled with phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) receptor chamber fluid. An amount of 25.4 mL of the BC was applied
onto the skin using a 25-mL positive displacement pipette and spread using a piston from a
1-mL syringe, as previously described (37), to give a nominal thickness of 0.1 mm. Each
diffusion cell was subjected to the same decontamination procedure similar to the in vivo
study. Pretreatment with the BC significantly ( p < 0.05) decreased skin surface spreading of
14C-VX and lowered the total amount penetrated, similar to the in vivo study results. On the
other hand, the three-dose parameters (i.e., unabsorbed, skin, and receptor/systemic) were
significantly ( p < 0.05) different except for one parameter (i.e., total amount absorbed)
between the two systems.
Recent BC experiments are summarized in Table 1.
Tests for Skin Protection: Barrier Effect
201

=== Page 219 ===
Table 1
Brief Data of Recent Experiments of Barrier Creams
Models
In vitro
In vivo
Animals or humans
Irritants or allergens
or penetrants
Barrier creams
Evaluations by
Efficacy
Reference
Human skin
Dyes (eosin, methyl
violet, oil red O)
16 BCs
Amount of dyes in the
epidermis
Various % protection
effects
Treffel et al. (15)
Human skin
Nickel-sensitive
patients
Nickel disc
Ethylenediaminetetraacetate
(EDTA) gels
Nickel content
Significantly reduced the
amount of nickel in
the epidermis in vitro,
and significantly
reduced positive
reactions in vivo
Fullerton and Menne (16)
Human skin
[35S]-SLS
3 quaternium-18 bentonite
(Q-18B) gels
Amount of [35S]-SLS
% protection effect was
88%, 81%, and 65%,
respectively
Zhai et al. (17)
Guinea pigs
n-Hexane, trichlorethy-
lene, toluene
3 water-miscible creams
Morphological assessment
Limited protective effects
Lachapelle et al. (23)
Guinea pigs and
humans
SLS, sodium hydroxide,
toluene, lactic acid
Several BCs
Various bioengineering
techniques
Some of them
suppressed irritation,
some failed
Frosch et al. (1,8,24,25)
Humans
Dyes (methylene blue
and oil red O)
3 BCs
Amount of dye penetrating
into strips
Two of them exhibited
effectiveness, one
enhanced cumulative
amount of dye
Zhai and Maibach (2)
Humans
SLS, ammonium
hydroxide (NH4OH)
and urea, Rhus
Several protectants
Clinical scores
Most of them
suppressed
the SLS irritation and
Rhus-allergic reaction,
failed to suppress
NH4OH and
urea irritation
Zhai et al. (5)
Humans
Self-application of BC
An oil-in-water emulsion
Fluorescence technique
Self-application of BC
was incomplete
Wigger-Alberti
et al. (26)
Humans
Skin with dermatitis
Hydrogel Barrier/repair
creams
Questionnaire
62% of the subjects’
and 75% of the
investigators’
assessments favored
the BC
Draelos (27)
202
Chan et al.

=== Page 220 ===
Table 1
Brief Data of Recent Experiments of Barrier Creams (Continued )
Humans
Antiseptics, gloves
Novel barrier cream
and cream with oil-
containing lotion
Clinical scores
Both creams offered
protection
McCormick et al. (28)
Humans
SLS on days 15–25
5% dexpanthenol
Various bioengineering
techniques and
photography
Capable to protect skin
in experimentally
elicited irritation
Biro et al. (29)
Humans
Shampoos and other
hair care products
5% aluminum chlorhydrate
Clinical scores,
bioengineering
techniques, subjects’
personal assessment
Very little difference
between BC and its
vehicle
Perrenoud et al. (30)
Humans
SLS and nickel
Skin tolerance–tested
moisturizing cream
TEWL
Significant decrease in
TEWL values of
treated sites
Paepe et al. (31)
Ears of the
domestic
white pigs
Domestic white
pigs
VX chemical warfare
AG-7 (70% w/w FomblinTM
HC/R plus 30% w/w
lubricant grade
polytetrafluoroethylene)
Acetylcholinesterase, pupil
diameter;
Treated groups survived
the 3-hr exposure;
Pretreatment of BC
lowered the amount
of VX penetration
Chilcott et al. (36)
Humans
SLS
6 skin care products
Chamber scarification test
and ROIT
Debba Wet and SLS
were more irritating;
Vaseline, Takstosan,
and Debba Wett did
not offer protection
from skin irritation.
Diepgen et al. (32)
Dissolved latex
proteins
Humans
Latex gloves
Topical formulation with zinc
Clinical Scores
Protected 95% of
subjects; Decreased
dissolved latex
proteins by *74 %
Modak et al. (33)
Pigskin
Humans
Patent Blue V
Quantify stratum corneum
penetration; and comparison
of 3 BCs for efficacy
Penetration behavior of
Patent Blue V
Higher concentrations
of the penetrant
yielded excess
amount recovered;
and Vaseline and
beeswax are effective
BCs
Teichman (34)
Abbreviations: SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate; BC, barrier cream; TEWL, transepidermal water loss; ROIT, repeated occlusive irritation test.
Tests for Skin Protection: Barrier Effect
203

=== Page 221 ===
CONCLUSIONS
Some BCs reduce CD under experimental conditions. But, inappropriate BC application may
enhance irritation rather than benefit. To achieve the optimal protective effects, BC should be
used with careful consideration based on a specific exposure conditions; also, the proper use of
BC should be instructed.
In vitro methods are simple, rapid, and safe and are recommended in screening
procedures for BC candidates. With radiolabeled methods, we may determine the accurate
protective and penetration results even in the lower levels of chemicals because of the sensitivity
of radiolabeled counting when BCs are to be evaluated. Animal experiments may be used to
generate kinetic data because of a similarity between humans and some animals (pigs, monkeys,
etc.) in percutaneous absorption and penetration for some compounds. But no one animal, with
its complex anatomy and biology, will simulate the penetration in humans for all compounds.
Therefore, the best estimate of human percutaneous absorption is determined by in vivo studies
in humans. The histological assessments may define what layers of skin are damaged or
protected and may provide the insight mechanism of BC. Noninvasive bioengineering
techniques may provide accurate, highly reproducible, and objective observations in quantifying
the inflammation response to various irritants and allergens when BCs are to be evaluated that
could assess subtle differences to supplement traditional clinical studies.
To validate these models, well-controlled field trials are required to define the
relationship of the model to the occupational setting. Finally, the clinical efficacy of BC
should be assessed in the workplace rather than in experimental circumstance. A recent review
of evaluating the efficacy of BC provides additional insights (38).
REFERENCES
1. Frosch PJ, Schulze-Dirks A, Hoffmann M, et al. Efficacy of skin barrier creams. (I). The repetitive
irritation test (RIT) in the guinea pig. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 28:94.
2. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Effect of barrier creams: human skin in vivo. Contact Dermatitis 1996; 35:92.
3. Lachapelle JM. Efficacy of protective creams and/or gels. In: Elsner P, Lachapelle JM, Wahlberg J M,
eds. Prevention of Contact Dermatitis, Curr Probl Dermatol. Basel, Karger, 1996:182.
4. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Percutaneous penetration (Dermatopharmacokinetics) in evaluating barrier
creams. In: Elsner P, Lachapelle JM, Wahlberg JM, eds. Prevention of Contact Dermatitis, Curr Probl
Dermatol. Basel: Karger, 1996:193.
5. Zhai H, Willard P, Maibach HI. Evaluating skin-protective materials against contact irritants and
allergens. An in vivo screening human model. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:155.
6. Wigger-Alberti W, Elsner P. Do barrier creams and gloves prevent or provoke contact dermatitis? Am
J Contact Dermatitis 1998; 9:100.
7. Goh CL. Cutting oil dermatitis on guinea pig skin. (I). Cutting oil dermatitis and barrier cream.
Contact Dermatitis 1991; 24:16.
8. Frosch PJ, Schulze-Dirks A, Hoffmann M, et al. Efficacy of skin barrier creams. (II). Ineffectiveness of a
popular “skin protector” against various irritants in the repetitive irritation test in the guinea pig.
Contact Dermatitis 1993; 29:74.
9. Frosch PJ, Kurte A, Pilz B. Biophysical techniques for the evaluation of skin protective creams. In:
Frosch PJ, Kligman AM, eds. Noninvasive Methods for the Quantification of Skin Functions. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1993:214.
10. Sadler CGA, Marriott RH. The evaluation of barrier creams. Br Med J 1946; 23:769.
11. Suskind RR. The present status of silicone protective creams. Ind Med Surg 1955; 24:413.
12. Langford NP. Fluorochemical resin complexes for use in solvent repellent hand creams. Am Ind Hyg
Assoc J 1978; 39:33.
13. Reiner R, Robmann K, Hooidonk CV, et al. Ointments for the protection against organophosphate
poisoning. Arzneim-Forsch/Drug Res 1982; 32:630.
14. Loden M. The effect of 4 barrier creams on the absorption of water, benzene, and formaldehyde into
excised human skin. Contact Dermatitis 1986; 14:292.
15. Treffel P, Gabard B, Juch R. Evaluation of barrier creams: An in vitro technique on human skin. Acta
Derm Venereol 1994; 74:7.
16. Fullerton A, Menne T. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of the effect of barrier gels in nickel contact
allergy. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 32:100.
17. Zhai H, Buddrus DJ, Schulz AA, et al. In vitro percutaneous absorption of sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS)
in human skin decreased by Quaternium-18 bentonite gels. Presented at: the American Academy of
Dermatology 56th Annual Meeting; Orlando; February 27, 1998; 113.
204
Chan et al.

=== Page 222 ===
18. Schwartz L, Warren LH, Goldman FH. Protective ointment for the prevention of poison ivy
dermatitis. Public Health Rep 1940; 55:1327.
19. Lupulescu AP, Birmingham DJ. Effect of protective agent against lipid-solvent-induced damages.
Ultrastructural and scanning electron microscopical study of human epidermis. Arch. Environ.
Health 1976; 31:29.
20. Mahmoud G, Lachapelle JM, Van Neste D. Histological assessment of skin damage by irritants: Its
possible use in the evaluation of a ‘barrier cream’. Contact Dermatitis 1984; 11:179.
21. Mahmoud G, Lachapelle JM. Evaluation of the protective value of an antisolvent gel by laser Doppler
flowmetry and histology. Contact Dermatitis 1985; 13:14.
22. Mahmoud G, Lachapelle JM. Uses of a guinea pig model to evaluate the protective value of barrier
creams and/or gels. In: Maibach HI, Lowe NJ, eds. Models in Dermatology. Basel: Karger, 1987:112.
23. Lachapelle JM, Nouaigui H, Marot L. Experimental study of the effects of a new protective cream
against skin irritation provoked by the organic solvents n-hexane, trichlorethylene and toluene.
Dermatosen 1990; 38:19.
24. Frosch PJ, Kurte A, Pilz B. Efficacy of skin barrier creams. (III). The repetitive irritation test (RIT) in
humans. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 29:113.
25. Frosch PJ, Kurte A. Efficacy of skin barrier creams. (IV). The repetitive irritation test (RIT) with a set of
4 standard irritants. Contact Dermatitis 1994; 31:161.
26. Wigger-Alberti W, Maraffio B, Wernli M, et al. Self-application of a protective cream. Pitfalls of
occupational skin protection. Arch Dermatol 1997; 133:861.
27. Draelos ZD. Hydrogel Barrier/Repair Creams and Contact Dermatitis. Am J of Contact Dermatitis
2000; 11(4):222–225.
28. McCormick RD, Buchman TL, Maki DG. Double-blind, randomized trial of scheduled use of a novel
barrier cream and an oil-containing lotion for protecting the hands of health-care workers. Am J Infect
Control 2000; 28:302–310.
29. Biro K, Thaci D, Ochsendorf FR, et al. Efficacy of dexapanthenol in skin protection against irritation:
a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Contact Dermatitis 2003; 49:80–84.
30. Perrenoud D, Gallezot D, van Melle G. The efficacy of a protective cream in a real-world apprentice
hairdresser environment. Contact Dermatitis 2001; 45:134–138.
31. De Paepe KP, Hachem J-P, Vanpee E, et al. Beneficial effects of a skin-tolerance tested moisturizing
cream on the barrier function in experimentally-elicited irritant and allergic contact dermatitis.
Contact Dermatitis 2001; 44:337–343.
32. Diepgen TL, Andersen KE, Schnetz E, et al. Dual Characteristics of Skin Care Creams Evaluated by
Two In-vivo Human Experimental Models. J Toxicol: Cutaneous and Ocular Toxicol. 2003; 22(3):
157–167.
33. Modak S, Gaonkar TA, Shitre M, et al. A Topical Cream Containing a Zinc Gel (Allergy Guard) as a
Prophylactic against Latex Glove-Related Contact Dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 2005; 16(1):22–27.
34. Teichmann A, Jacobi U, Wailber E, et al. An in vivo model to evaluate the efficacy creams on the level
of skin penetration to chemicals. Contact Dermatitis 2006; 54:5–13.
35. Teichmann A, Jacobi U, Weigmann HJ, et al. Reservoir function of the stratum corneum: Development
of an in vivo method to quantitatively determine the stratum corneum reservoir for topically applied
substances. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2005; 18:75–80.
36. Chilcott RP, Dalton CH, Hill I, et al. Evaluation of a Barrier Cream against the Chemical Warfare
Agent VX using the Domestic White Pig. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 2005; 97:35–38.
37. Chilcott RP, Dalton CH, Hill I, et al. Clinical manifestations of VX poisoning following percutaneous
exposure in the domestic pig. Human Exp Toxicol 2003; 22:255–261.
38. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Evaluating Efficacy of Barrier Creams: In Vitro and In Vivo Models. In: Zhai H,
Wilhelm KP, Maibach, HI, eds. Dermatotoxicology, 7th ed. Florida: CRC Press, 2008:621–626.
Tests for Skin Protection: Barrier Effect
205

=== Page 224 ===
19
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Studies
of Skin Lipid Structure
Kouichi Nakagawa
RI Research Center, Fukushima Medical University, Hikarigaoka, Fukushima, Japan
INTRODUCTION
Stratum corneum (SC) is the outermost layer of skin and the skin barrier against chemicals,
surfactants, UV irradiation, and environmental stresses.The SC has a heterogeneous structure
composed of corneocytes embedded in the intercellar lipid lamellae, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The morphology of the SC lipids is closely associated with the main epidermal barrier.
Knowledge of the lipid structure is important in understanding the mechanism of irritant
dermatitis and other SC diseases. The structural properties of the SC lipid are obtained by the
analyses of aliphatic spin probes incorporated into intercellular lamella lipids using electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) (1–7). The EPR spin probe method measures nondistractively
the ordering of the lipid bilayer of SC.
EPR (or electron spin resonance, ESR) utilizes spectroscopy, which measures the freedom
of an unpaired electron in an atom or molecule. The principles behind magnetic resonance are
common to both EPR and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), but there are differences in the
magnitudes and signs of the magnetic interactions involved. EPR probes an unpaired electron
spin, while NMR probes a nuclear spin. EPR can measure 109 molar concentration of the
probe and is one of the most sensitive spectroscopic tools. Therefore, EPR is able to elucidate
skin lipid structures as well as dynamics.
EPR in conjunction with the spin probe (or label) method has considerable advantages in
the study of lipid structures as well as behaviors. The macroscopic and local viscosity of the
environment profoundly influences the rate of lipid molecular reorientation. The phys-
icochemical properties of intercellar lipids of SC as a function of various surfactants (1,2), water
contents (3), various kinds of spin probes (4), and ordering (or fluidity) change of the SC lipid
(5) were investigated. These studies provided the fluidity-related behaviors of SC at the
different conditions by measuring EPR signal intensities and hyperfine coupling values.
Furthermore, quantitative analysis of the experimental spectra can be achieved by a modern
slow-tumbling simulation, which showed that the spectral simulation provided insight into the
quantitative ordering of human lipid structure (6,7). In this chapter, the quantitative
evaluations of SC lipid structure as a function of skin depth are described.
EPR APPARATUS
EPR apparatus consists of a klystron to generate microwaves, electromagnet, resonant cavity,
microwave detector, amplifier, A/D converter, and PC (Fig. 2). The microwaves from the
klystron have a constant frequency, and those microwaves reflected from the resonant cavity
are detected, changed to an electronic signal, amplified, and then recorded. In contrast to
NMR, substances that contain unpaired spin can be observed by EPR. Paramagnetic
substances including transition metal complexes, free radicals, and photochemical intermedi-
ates are observed. Approximately 1013 mole of a substance gives an observable signal, thus
EPR has great sensitivity.
EPR OF SPIN PROBES (or SPIN LABELS)
Nitroxide Probes for EPR
Momentum of electron spin in a magnetic field orients only two quantum states: ms ¼ ½ and
ms ¼ ½. Application of an oscillating field perpendicular to a steady magnetic field (H)
induces transitions between the two states, provided the frequency (n) of the oscillating field

=== Page 225 ===
satisfies the resonance condition:
DE ¼ hv ¼ gH
ð1Þ
where DE is the energy-level separation, h is Planck’s constant, g is a dimensionless constant
called the g-value, b is the electron Bohr magneton, and H is the applied magnetic field.
The interaction of an electron spin in resonance with a neighboring nuclear spin in
a molecule is called hyperfine coupling. In the case of nitroxide spin probe, 14N of the probe
has three quantum states: þ1, 0, and 1. Each quantum state interacts with an electron spin
and further splits into two sets of energy states (Fig. 3). The selection rules for transitions in
hyperfine coupling are Dms ¼ 1 and DmI ¼ 0. Thus, one can observe three transition
(resonance) lines for fast-tumbling nitroxide spin probe in a spectrum. The interval of the
resonance lines is called the hyperfine coupling constant. The EPR spectra are usually recorded
as the first derivative of the absorption spectrum as shown in lower part of Figure 3.
Single-Chain Aliphatic Spin Probes
The ordering (or fluidity) of the lipid bilayer is obtained with doxyl stearic acid (DSA), which
is most commonly used. The chemical structures of DSAs are depicted in Figure 4. Changes of
lipid chain ordering are able to monitor using the probes. The orientation of spin probe reflects
the local molecular environment and should serve as indicator of conformational changes in
lipid bilayers.
Figure 2
Block diagram of EPR spectrometer.
Figure 1
Schematic representation of the “Brick and Mortar” model of the stratum corneum is shown. Also, the
most likely probe location in the lipid bilayer and pathways of drug permeation through intact stratum corneum is
shown.
208
Nakagawa

=== Page 226 ===
The ordering at different position of the lipid bilayer is obtained with 5-, 7-, 12-, and 16-
DSA. The 5-DSA is usually used for extraction of information near surface region in a lipid
membrane. The 16-DSA is for near the end of the lipid chain. It is notable that other spin
probes are also commercially available.
EPR Line Shapes Due to Spin Probe Motion
The line widths can vary under certain spin probe environments. When line broadening arises
from incomplete averaging of the g-value and the hyperfine coupling interactions within the
limit of rapid tumbling in a medium, EPR line shape starts changing from the triplet pattern.
EPR spectra of nitroxide radicals for different tumbling times as well as different order
parameters are presented in Figure 5. If a spin probe is oriented (immobilized) in a membrane,
EPR spectrum is an anisotropic pattern, which clearly shows parallel and perpendicular
hyperfine coupling structures (the top spectrum in Fig. 5). The order parameter is
approximately 0.7 or higher. If a spin probe tumbles relatively fast (weakly immobilized) in
a membrane, EPR spectrum is a triplet pattern with unequal intensities. The order parameter is
usually very small (~0.1).
Figure 4
Chemical structures of vari-
ous doxyl stearic acid (DSA) spin probes.
Figure 3
Hyperfine levels and transitions for a nitroxide nitrogen
nucleus (14N) of I ¼ 1 with positive coupling constant.
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Studies of Skin Lipid Structure
209

=== Page 227 ===
CALCULATION OF ORDER PARAMETER
Conventional Order Parameter (S )
The order parameter indicates the lipid fluidity and microenvironment of the medium in
which the spin probe is incorporated. The conventional order parameter (S) is determined by
the hyperfine coupling (A) of the EPR spectrum according to the following relations (8):
S ¼
AII  A?
AZZ  ð1=2ÞðAXX þ AYYÞ
a
a0 ;
ð2Þ
a0 ¼ AII þ 2A?
3
;
ð3Þ
where a is the isotropic hyperfine coupling value, (AXX þ AYY þ AZZ)/3; AXX, AYY, and AZZ are
the principal values of the spin probe. The experimental hyperfine couplings of 2A|| and 2A\
are obtained from the EPR spectrum. In a calculation of the order parameter, the principal
components of AXX, AYY, AZZ ¼ (0.66, 0.55, 3.45) mT and gXX, gYY, gZZ ¼ (2.0086, 2.0063, 2.0025)
were used for 5-DSA (9).
Note that the conventional analysis measuring 2A|| and 2A\ gives limited information
concerning the probe moiety in the lipid. Changes in the probe behavior are reflected in the
EPR line width as well as the line shape, besides hyperfine values. In some cases, S-values do
not represent the subtle difference in overall EPR spectral changes related to the lipid chain
ordering (6). Thus, the conventional calculation is qualitative analysis.
Order Parameter (S0) by Slow-Motional EPR Simulation
In general, the large ordering value indicates the anisotropy of the probe site in the lipid
(Fig. 5). For example, the spin probe is incorporated in the highly oriented intercellular lipid
bilayer in normal skin; the probe cannot move freely because of the rigid lipid structure. Once
the normal lipid structure is completely destroyed by chemical and/or physical stress, the
clear triplet spectrum yields the small ordering value.
The slow-tumbling motions of the spin probes can be exactly calculated using a nonlinear
least square–fitting program called NLLS, which analyzes the experimental EPR spectra on the
basis of stochastic Liouville’s equation (10–12). The simulation of the EPR spectra for spin
probes incorporated into multilamella lipids is carried out using a microscopically ordered but
macroscopically disordered (MOMD) model introduced by Meirovitch et al. (13). This model is
based on the characteristics of the dynamic structure of lipid dispersions.
The order parameter, S0, is defined as (14,15):
S0 ¼ D2
00


¼
1
2 ð3 cos2 g  1Þ


¼
R
d O expðU=kTÞD2
00
R
d O expðU=kTÞ
;
ð4Þ
which measures the angular extent of the rotational diffusion of the nitroxide moiety. Gamma (g) is
the angle between the rotational diffusion symmetry axis and the z-axis of the nitroxide axis
Figure 5
Nitroxide EPR line shape as
a function of tumbling time and order
parameter. Parallel and perpendicular
hyperfine couplings, 2A|| and 2A\, are
also indicated for an anisotropic (immo-
bilized) EPR spectrum.
210
Nakagawa

=== Page 228 ===
system; z is the axis of the nitrogen 2pz orbital, and x-axis is along the N–O bond (Fig. 6). The
local or microscopic ordering of the nitroxide spin probe in the membrane is characterized by
the S0 value. A larger S0 value indicates very restricted motion in the membrane. It is notable that
the angle in relation with the S0 value is discussed later in the next section.
Conventional (S ) and Simulated Order Parameter (S0)
The “Brick and Mortar” model of the SC is illustrated in Figure 1. SC intercellular lipids
arrange themselves into bilayer and pack into lamellae. The single-chain 5-DSA normally
dissolves into lipids and fat phases. The most likely location of the single-chain probe in the SC
is shown in Figure 1. The aliphatic probe will be located in the lipid phase and fat-like
sebaceous secretion of the SC.
Stripped SC was examined to characterize the lipid chain ordering using two methods:
conventional order parameter and simulated order parameter (5,6). One piece of stripped SC
(~737 mm2) was incubated in ~50 mm 5-DSA aqueous solution for about 1 hour at 378C. After
rinsing with deionized water to remove excess spin probe, the SC sample was mounted on an
EPR cell. A commercially available X-band (9 GHz), EPR spectrometer, was used to measure
the ordering of the SC sample. The typical spectrometer settings were the following:
microwave power, 10 mW; time constant, 1 second; sweep time, 480 seconds; modulation,
0.2 mT; and sweep width, 15 mT. The detailed sample preparations are described elsewhere (7).
Figure 7 shows the experimental and simulated EPR spectra of 5-DSA in the SC. The
reasonable agreement of the experimental and simulated spectra suggests that simulation
analysis can provide detailed information regarding the SC lipids. The S0 value changes from
0.61 to 0.96, while the S value is in the range of 0.56 to 0.59. The conventional S value was
obtained by Eq. (2) measuring the hyperfine values from the observed spectrum.
There are significant differences between the conventional and simulated order
parameters. Because the slow-tumbling simulation calculates the total line shape of the
Figure 6
A schematic representation of a conformation of DSA spin probe in
the SC membrane, where z-axis of the acyl chain is parallel to z-axis of the
nitrogen 2Pz orbital.
Figure 7
Experimental (solid line) and simulated (dashed
line) EPR spectra of 5-DSA probe. Stripping numbers show
consecutively stripped SC from the surface downward. The
arrow of stripping number 1 indicates the characteristic peak.
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Studies of Skin Lipid Structure
211

=== Page 229 ===
spectrum, it is able to extract more detailed information about the SC structure than the
conventional analysis, which is normally ambiguous in distinguishing the two hyperfine
components (parallel and perpendicular) from the experimental spectrum because of the
presence of weak and broad signals (6). Thus, the S0 values (0.2–0.5) obtained by the simulation
suggest that the outermost SC layers are less rigid (or more mobile), while the deeper lipid
layers (S0~0.9) have more rigid and oriented structures.
The arrow in the spectrum indicates the characteristic peak, which is prominent only for
the first stripping (Fig. 7). This peak diminishes in intensity with increasing depth in the SC.
The marked peak appears near the center of the spectrum because the probe embedded in the
first stripping sample has greater freedom of motion. The other two lines of the nitroxide probe
overlaid the central region of the spectrum. The results imply that signals can originate from
sebaceous secretion.
Further investigation of the characteristic peak was performed. Figure 8A shows the EPR
spectrum of the first stripping from SC. The strong and broad peak observed for the SC sheet
from the human forehead is shown in Figure 8B. The peak intensity decreases after washing
the SC with soap (Fig. 8C). Thus, the signal can be attributed to sebaceous secretion (7). The
strength of the signal is considered to reflect the abundant sebaceous secretion at the forehead
compared with that of the forearm.
Furthermore, one can calculate the angle (g in Fig. 6) between the rotational diffusion
symmetry axis (the lipid in SC) and the z-axis of the nitroxide axis system. Figure 9 represents
the schematic illustration of the bilayer distance in relation to the angle. The simulated S0 value
of 0.61 can be the angle of 30. The value of 0.96 is the angle of 9.4. The angle suggests that the
SC lipids align nearly perpendicularly to the bilayer surface. The larger S0 value yields larger
distance between the lipid bilayer. The analysis implies that the long distance of the lipid
bilayer can be related to the well-oriented SC structure.
Figure 8
Experimental EPR spectra of 5-DSA in (A) the first
stripped SC from human mid-volar forearm, (B) the first stripping
SC from human forehead prewashing, and (C) the first stripping
SC from human forehead after-washing. The short dashed line
corresponds to the characteristic signal. The long dashed line
corresponds to the probe incorporated into the SC lipids.
Figure 9
The bilayer distances and the values of
simulated order parameter related to the angles between
the bilayer surface and the single-chain probe.
212
Nakagawa

=== Page 230 ===
OTHER APPLICATIONS OF THE EPR METHOD
Effects of Surfactants
Different types as well as mixtures of surfactants change the fluid structure of lipid bilayer
differently. Kawasaki et al. examined the influence of anionic surfactants, sodium lauryl
sulfate (SLS) and sodium lauroyl glutamate (SLG), on human SC by the EPR spin label method
(1). The order parameter obtained by 1.0% wt SLS-treated cadaver SC (C-SC) was 0.52. On the
other hand, the high S value of 0.73 for 1.0% wt SLG was obtained. The results suggest clear
surfactant effects on the structure of lipid bilayer. In addition, a reasonable correlation between
order parameters and human clinical data (visual scores and transepidermal water loss values)
was shown.
Effects of Skin Penetration Enhancers
Interaction of skin penetration enhancer correlates with the fluidity of the intercellular lipid
bilayers. Quan and Maibach investigated the effects on a C-SC at three concentrations of
laurocapram (1-dodecylazacyclo-heptan-2-one) utilizing the EPR spin probe method (16). The
EPR spectra of laurocapram-treated human SC were totally different from those of untreated
C-SC. The results suggest that laurocapram causes an increase in the flexibility and polarity of
local bilayers surrounding 5-DSA.
CONCLUSION
EPR along with a modern computational analysis provides quantitative insight into the SC
structure as a function of the depth. The EPR spectral pattern contains important information
regarding the probe moiety as well as the SC structure. Satisfactory agreement between
the experimental and calculated spectrum can provide a quantitative S0, which gives the
microscopic lipid ordering in the SC lipid. The spectral simulation offers a reliable value of the
lipid ordering where conventional order parameter cannot reveal the detailed ordering (6). In
addition, the EPR method recognizes sebaceous exudates (7). Therefore, EPR together with a
computational analysis is a powerful method to investigate various SC.
REFERENCES
1. Kawasaki Y, D. Quan D, Sakamoto K, et al. Influence of surfactant mixtures on intercellular lipid
fluidity and skin barrier function. Skin Res Technol 1999; 5:96–101.
2. Mizushima J, Kawasaki Y, Tabohashi T, et al. Effect of surfactants on human stratum corneum:
electron paramagnetic resonance. Int J Pharm 2000; 197:193–202.
3. Alonso A, Meirelles NC, Yushmanov VE, et al. Water increases the fluidity of intercellar membranes
of stratum corneum: correlation with water permeability, elastic, and electrical resistance properties.
J Invest Dermatol 1996; 106; 1058–1063.
4. Kitagawa S, Ikarashi A, Analysis of electron spin resonance spectra of alkyl spin labels in excised
guinea pig dorsal skin, its stratum corneum, delipidized skin, and stratum corneum model lipid
liposomes. Chem Pharm Bull 2001; 49:165–168.
5. Mizushima J, Kawasaki Y, Sakamoto K, et al. Electron paramagnetic resonance: a new technique in
skin research. Skin Res Technol 2000; 6:100–107.
6. Nakagawa K, Mizushima J, Takino Y, et al. Chain ordering of stratum corneum lipids investigated by
EPR slow-tumbling simulation. Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Mol. & Biomol. Spectroscopy 2006;
63:816–820.
7. Yagi E, Sakamoto K, Nakagawa K, Depth dependence of stratum corneum lipid ordering: a slow-
tumbling simulation for electron paramagnetic resonance. J Invest Dermatol 2007; 127:895–899.
8. Hubbell WL, McConnell HM. Molecular motion in spin-labeled phospholipids and membrane. J Am
Chem Soc 1971; 93:314–326.
9. Ge M, Rananavare SB, Freed JH, et al. ESR studies of stearic acid binding to bovine serum albumin.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1990; 1036:228–326.
10. Meirovitch E, Igner D, Igner E, et al. Electron-spin relaxation and ordering in smectic and supercooled
nematic liquid crystals. J Chem Phys 1982; 77:3915–3938.
11. Schneider DJ, Freed JH. Calculating slow-motional magnetic resonance spectra. In: Berliner LJ,
Reuben J, eds. Biological Magnetic Resonance Vol. 8. New York: Plenum Press, 1989:1–76.
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Studies of Skin Lipid Structure
213

=== Page 231 ===
12. Budil DE, Lee S, Saxena S, et al. Nonlinear-least-squares analysis of slow-motion EPR spectra in one
and two dimensions using a modified Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. J Magn Reson Ser A 1996;
120:155–189.
13. Meirovitch E, Freed JH. Analysis of slow-motional electron spin resonance spectra in smectic phases
in terms of molecular configuration, intermolecular interactions, and dynamics. J Phys Chem 1984;
88:4995–5004.
14. Crepeau RH, Saxena S, Lee S, et al. Studies on lipid membranes by two-dimensional Fourier
transform ESR: enhancement of resolution to ordering and dynamics. Biophys J 1994; 66:1489–1504.
15. Ge M, Freed JH. Polarity profiles in oriented and dispersed phosphatidylcholine bilayers are different:
an ESR study. Biophys J 1998; 74:910–917.
16. Quan D, Maibach HI, An electron paramagnetic resonance study: I effect of Azone on 5-doxyl stearic
acid-labeled human stratum corneum. Int J Pharm 1994; 104:61–72.
214
Nakagawa

=== Page 232 ===
20
Human Skin Buffering Capacity: An Overview
Jackie Levin
AZCOM, Glendale, Arizona, U.S.A.
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
When dilute aqueous acid or alkaline solutions come into contact with the skin, the change in
pH is generally temporary, and the original skin pH (a measure of the hydronium ion
concentration) is rapidly restored indicating that the skin has significant buffering capacity.
A buffer is a chemical system that can limit changes in pH when an acid or a base is
added. Buffer solutions consist of a weak acid and its conjugated base. The system has its
optimum buffering capacity when about 50% of the buffer is dissociated or, in other words, at
a pH about equal to its pKa (1). The pKa is the negative of the common logarithm of the acid
dissociation constant (Ka) and is a measure for the strength of the acid. The buffer capacity is
further dependent on the concentration of the system.
SKIN’S ACID CHARACTER AND BUFFER CAPACITY
The acidic character of the skin was first mentioned by Heuss (2) and later by Schade and
Marchionini (3) who introduced the term “acid mantle” for the skin’s acidic outer surface pH.
The importance of the skin’s acidic character has more recently been recognized as playing a
crucial role in barrier homeostasis and immune function (4–6). The skin was further shown to
partially resist acidic/alkaline aggression to some extent (7).
This article provides a review of studies investigating the skin’s buffering capacity,
specifically the epidermis, via alkali/acidic aggression tests. This review tries to discern which
components of the epidermis are most likely responsible for the skin’s buffering capacity.
Alkali/Acidic Aggression Tests
An acid/alkali aggression test is a way to measure the acid/alkali resistance (i.e., buffering
capacity) of the skin. Alkali/acidic resistance tests were commonly used in the 1960s to detect
workers who may likely develop occupational diseases in certain chemical work environments
(7). A mild variation of the alkali/acidic resistance tests, also called acid/alkali neutralization
test, assesses how quickly the skin is able to buffer applied acids/bases without the occurrence
of skin corrosion. Repetitive applications of acid or base demonstrate that the skin’s buffering
capacity is limited and may be overcome; as illustrated by the long time required for
neutralization (8–11).
The next section focuses on the aggression tests aiming to study which components of the
epidermis are responsible for the skin’s buffering capacity.
Free Fatty Acids/Sebum
Early experimentation hypothesized that the sebum contributes to the buffering capacity of the
skin in two ways: first, it protects the epidermis against the influence of alkali by slowing
down the exposure and penetration of acids or alkalis applied to the skin (12–14), and second,
the fatty acids in sebum may act as a buffer system (15,16).
Later experiments by Lincke et al. (17) refuted the second hypothesis by demonstrating
that the sebum had no relevant acid and a negligible alkali-buffering capacity of around pH 9.
Further challenging the hypothesis, a quicker neutralization was observed on the delipidized
skin than the untreated skin (12,14).
Vermeer concluded similarly when comparing the neutralization on soles and forearm
with and without sebum removal (16). However, when comparing these skin regions,

=== Page 233 ===
differences in the sebum content and stratum corneum (SC) thickness may have also
contributed to the observed effect.
Vermeer (14) and Neuhaus (18) believe that the increased rate of neutralization is due to
a higher carbon dioxide (CO2) diffusion. This theory, discussed later in detail, is generally not
accepted but is also not clearly substantiated either way. After lipid removal, the skin starts to
increase acid production, which may account for the faster neutralization. The same
investigators also found that the increase in neutralization after lipid removal is temporary
and limited to the first few minutes, which is probably related to the activity of sebaceous
glands to produce relevant amounts of sebum.
Because of the negligible buffering capacity of sebum and to standardize the experiment
(limit inter- and intra-individual variability), today most neutralization experiments are
performed after cleansing the skin with solvents, which remove most of the sebum, including
fatty acids.
Epidermal Water-Soluble Constituents
Vermeer et al. (16) first demonstrated the importance of water-soluble constituents to the skin’s
buffering ability. Water-soaked skin, where the water-soluble constituents were extracted,
demonstrated a significantly reduced neutralization capacity, indicating that water-soluble
substance constituent(s) of the skin is a major contributor to the buffering capacity (10,19,20).
Water soaking may have induced also other changes to the skin, altering buffering capacity.
The significance of water-soluble constituents of the epidermis to the buffering capacity
of the skin further supports the theory of minimal contribution from the sebum of the skin due
to its lipid-soluble nature (16).
Sweat
Eccrine sweat initially accelerates the neutralization of alkalis (8–11,16,19,21,22). Spier and
Pascher (23) suggest that the main buffering agents of sweat are lactic acid and amino acids
(AAs). The lactic acid-lactate system in sweat has a highly efficient buffering capacity between
pH 4 and 5 (13). However, it has not been completely demonstrated that lactic acid is the main
buffering agent in sweat or at the surface of the skin. Conversely, the contribution of AAs to
the buffering capacity of sweat and of the horny layer surface has been investigated thoroughly
(16,19,22).
By comparing sweating and non-sweating persons, Vermeer et al. (16) found that AAs
play a significant role in neutralization during the first five minutes while lactic acid does not.
This confirms that AAs are key elements contributing to the buffering capacity of the skin.
Keratin
The contribution of keratin to the buffering capacity of the skin remains questionable. Keratin
is an amphoteric protein with the ability to neutralize acids and alkalis in vitro (8–11,17,24–26)
and hence may participate in the skin’s buffering capacity. Scales scraped from the normal skin
bind small amounts of alkali in vitro (27,28). However, Vermeer and coworkers showed that
water-soluble constituents of the epidermis participate more in the skin’s buffering capacity
than the insoluble constituents of the skin such as keratin.
While insoluble keratin filaments on the skin may have only little buffering capacity
(16,29), keratin hydrolysates and free AAs might contribute to the water-soluble portion of the
epidermis. However, AA’s composition of keratin (30,31) does not correspond with AA found
in the water-soluble portion of the SC (23), which implies that keratin is not a major contributor
to the pool of free AA.
Despite little evidence of keratin’s role in the buffering capacity, a modifying action of
keratin is assumed (17). Without an intact keratin layer, neither a physiological surface pH nor
normal neutralization capacity can be maintained (32). Further research remains to be
conducted to determine keratin’s role in the buffering capacity of the epidermis.
Stratum Corneum Thickness
Differences in thickness of the SC may explain the interindividual differences in buffering
capacity (33). The thicker the SC, the better the buffering (10,19), which is likely related to a
better barrier for acids/alkalis within a thicker SC (33). In addition, as the skin ages, its
216
Levin and Maibach

=== Page 234 ===
thickness diminishes and its buffering ability diminishes (34). Current technology, allowing
more accurate SC measurement, may help in clarifying this point (35).
CO2
Little is known about the role of CO2/HCO3
 participating in the skin’s buffering capacity.
Burckhardt’s studies were the first to suggest that the CO2 diffusing from the epidermal layer
may be responsible for neutralizing alkali in contact with the skin (8–11). He demonstrated
(8,9) that when a five-minute alkali neutralization experiment was repeated subsequently
several times on the same skin area, the neutralization times were becoming longer, but finally
reached an approximately constant time. He suggested that the shorter neutralization times at
the beginning were due to acids present on the skin surface rapidly neutralizing the alkali. He
further suggested that, after successive alkali exposure, the endogenous acids were not
anymore present on the skin surface, which resulted in longer neutralization times, and that
through skin diffusing, CO2 took over the role in neutralizing the alkali. At this time,
Burckhardt’s hypothesis of the role of CO2 as a buffering agent was accepted by others despite
the rather weak experimental evidence (17,25,36,37).
For instance, the increased neutralization time after lipid removal of the skin surface with
the help of soaps or neutral detergents was believed to be the consequence of a greater
diffusion of CO2, although this has never been quantified (13,36,37). It was also postulated that
the hydrated SC retains CO2 and limits its diffusion, whereas a moderate hydration level was
regarded best for an effective alkali neutralization, although this has also never been analyzed
in further details (37).
Clearly, the above studies fail to provide quantitative support for their conclusions
concerning CO2 as a relevant buffering agent. More likely, the constant neutralization time
after successive alkali exposure may be related to the destruction of the “skin barrier” and
unlimited penetration of the applied alkali as suggested by others (18,19).
Knowing that several authors considered CO2 a relevant contributor in alkali neutral-
ization without having quantitative data to sustain their hypothesis, Vermeer et al. (19)
demonstrated that CO2 is unlikely of great importance for alkali neutralization on the skin.
His experiment was focused on the first minutes of the neutralization process in contrast
to the previous experiments mentioned (18,25,36,37), which paid attention to the later
neutralization process. For example, Piper (25) analyzed the neutralization process for up to
one hour and concluded that for the first half an hour alkalis are neutralized on the skin by the
skin’s own amphoteric substances (such as AAs) but in the second half hour diffusing CO2
takes over. Piper’s conclusions are not necessarily contradictory to the results obtained by
Vermeer above and may actually be in agreement. According to Piper, “the longer the contact
between the skin and alkali, the greater the importance of CO2.” Supported by the recent
discoveries of relatively low level of CO2 production in the epidermis and the limited activity
of the Kreb’s cycle suggesting that a minimal amount of CO2 would be available for
neutralization (30), it seems likely that CO2 does not significantly contribute in the alkali
neutralization process. Further studies should help to clarify the relevance of CO2 in the skin’s
buffering capacity.
Free AAs
The free AAs in the water-soluble portion of the epidermis seem to play a significant role in the
neutralization of alkalis within the first five minutes of experimentation (16,25,26).
Piper (25) found a good buffering capacity of the skin between pH 4 and pH 8, with an
optimum at 6.5 well corresponding to the pKa of AA. This observation further indicates that
lactic may be less relevant in alkali neutralization of the skin.
Despite the general agreement about the role of AAs in the neutralization of alkalis,
which AAs are the key buffering agents remains an open question. The AAs’ composition of
the upper SC was reported by Spier and Pascher (23).
Spier and Pascher reported that the free AAs of the SC account for 40% of the water-
soluble substances extracted from the SC removed by tape stripping (23,29). From the AAs
present, 20% to 32% was serine and 9% to 16% was citrulline. Aspartic acid, glycine, threonine,
and alanine were 6% to 10%. The smallest concentration of AAs accounted for glutamic acid at
0.5% to 2%.
Human Skin Buffering Capacity
217

=== Page 235 ===
The water-soluble, free AAs on the skin surface may originate from three possible
sources.
1.
Eccrine sweat
Sweat contains 0.05% AAs, which remain on the surface of the skin after
evaporation. The specific AA found in sweat was not investigated.
2.
Degradation of skin proteins
Degradation of skin proteins, including proteins constituting the desmosomes,
may be a source for AAs such as serine, glycine, and alanine.
3.
Hair follicle
Citrulline is recognized as a constituent of protein synthesized in the inner root
sheath and medulla cells of the hair follicle. Specific proteases release citrulline.
Citrulline was also found in proteins in the membrane of the corneocytes as well as
free floating (30).
Further research needs to be completed to identify which AAs contribute to the
buffering capacity of the skin and what is their main source.
DISCUSSION
The buffering capacity depends on many factors such as the following.
Alkali/Acid Agression
The nature and content of epidermal constituents available for buffering is likely a function of
the acid/alkali aggression. For example, the more corrosive the compounds, the more the
destruction of the skin, which results in an increased level of skin substances potentially
available for buffering. In addition, a corrosive compound damages the skin’s barrier, leading
to increased penetration of the acid/alkali, which may further influence the skin’s buffering
capacity.
Skin Condition
Skin conditions were shown to greatly influence buffering capacity. Besides the skin’s barrier
properties, which were shown to vary between subjects and depend on the skin conditions and
health, the presence of free AAs participating in the neutralization process may also play a role
in the buffering capacity of the skin. Subjects with low buffering capacity are especially
susceptible to the irritating effect of acids and/or bases, and predisposed to contact
occupational eczema and dermatitis (29).
CONCLUSION
Whereas the skin’s exquisite buffering capacity has been widely studied in vitro and in vivo,
further research needs to be completed to better understand the exact mechanisms.
Experimentation reviewed here suggests that AAs are primarily responsible for the
neutralization capacity of the skin. The exact sources of the AAs as well as the types of AAs
that are primarily responsible for the neutralization capacity remain still rather speculative. In
addition, it seems that a sweat component increases the neutralization capacity of the
epidermis. Whether the buffering component of sweat is additional AA or lactic acid remains
unknown.
While additional components of the epidermis such as sebum, keratin, and CO2 seem not
to significantly participate as buffering agents of the epidermis, they still do seemto play a role
in the protection of the skin from the harm of acids and bases. Sebum may slow down the
initial penetration of applied substances. Keratin is important for the hydration of the skin and
may contribute some of the free AAs responsible for buffering of applied acids/alkalis. Finally,
CO2 may play a role in the buffering capacity of certain compounds under certain
circumstances such as after prolonged or repetitive exposure to an alkali.
When the buffering capacity is exhausted, the pH of the skin becomes significantly
altered; repair mechanism similar to wound healing may step in to restore the normal skin’s
pH (38). After thorough review of studies investigating the buffering capacity of the skin and
218
Levin and Maibach

=== Page 236 ===
other studies investigating the endogenous mechanisms for restoring and maintaining the skin
pH, it is interesting to note that the two topics have been investigated separately without
looking for a commonality. It would not be surprising if the mechanisms responsible for
maintaining the skin pH influence the processes responsible for maintaining the skin’s
buffering capacity. The above rationale may shed light on skin diseases in persons with
diminished buffering capacity, an increased sensitivity to acids and/or bases, and an increased
skin surface pH.
Taken together, we interpret this rich experimental literature, even if often quite old, as
leading the way to the use of contemporary methods to further refine our insight into the skin’s
buffering capacity. This capacity, when fully understood, may lead not only to the potential for
decreasing threat to the skin of exogenous acids and bases, but for establishing an
experimental base for optimal pH in many pharmacologic, metabolic, and toxicologic
situations.
REFERENCES
1. Costanzo L. Physiology. 2nd ed. Saunders 2002:110–115.
2. Heuss, E. Die Reaktion des Scheisses beim gesunden Menschen, Monatsh. Prakt, Dermatol 1892;
14:343.
3. Schade H, Marchionini A. Zur physikalischen Cheme der Hautoberflache. Arch Dermatol Syphil
1928; 154:690.
4. Kim M, Patel R, Shinn A. Evaluation of gender difference in skin type and pH. J Dermatol Sci 2006;
41:153–156.
5. Greener B, Hughes A, Bannister N, et al. Proteases and pH in chronic wounds. J Wound Care 2005;
14(2):59–61.
6. Hachem J, Crumrine D, Fluhr J, et al. pH directly regulates epidermal permeability barrier
homeostasis, and stratum corneum integrity/cohesion. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 121:345–353.
7. Agache P. Measurement of skin surface acidity. In: Agache P, Humbert P, Maibach, H, eds. Measuring
Skin. Springer; 2004:84–86.
8. Burckhardt W. Beitrage zur Ekzemfrage. II. Die rolle des alkali in Pathogenese des ekzems speziell
des Gewerbeekzems. Arch F Dermat U Syph 1935; 173:155–167.
9. Burckhardt W. Beitrage zur Ekzemfrage. III. Die rolle des alkalischadigung der haut bei der
experimentellen Sensibilisierung gengen Nickel. Arch F Dermat U Syph 1935; 173:262–266.
10. Burckhardt W. Neure untersuchungen uber die Alkaliempfindlicjkeit der haut. Dermatologica 1947;
94:73–96.
11. Burckhardt W, Baumle W. Die Beziehungen der saurempfindlichkeit zur Alkaliempfindlicjkeit der
haut. Dermatologica 1951; 102:294–300.
12. Dunner M. Der Einfluss des Hauttalges auf die Alkaliabwehr der Haut. Dermatologica 1950; 101:
17–28.
13. Fishberg E, Bierman W. Acid base balance in sweat. J Biol Chem 1932: 97:433–441.
14. Vermeer D. The effect of sebum on the neutralization of alkali. Dederl Tijdschr V Geneesk 1950;
94:1530–1531.
15. McKenna B. The composition of the surface skin fat (‘Sebum’) from the human forearm J Invest Derm
1950; 15:33–37.
16. Vermeer D, Jong J, Lenestra J. The significance of amino acids for the neutralization by the skin.
Dermatologica 1951; 103:1–18.
17. Lincke H. Beitrage zur Chemie und Biologie des Hautoberflachenfetts. Arch f Dermat U Syph 1949;
188:453–481.
18. Neuhaus H. Fettehalt und Alkalineutralisationskahigkeit der haut unter Awendung alkalifrier
waschmittel. Arch f Dermat U Syph 1950; 190:57–66.
19. Vermeer D, Jong J, Lenestra J. The significance of amino acids for the neutralization by the skin.
Dermatologica 1951; 103:1–18.
20. Schmidt P. Uber die Beeinflussung der Wasserstoffionenkonzentration der Hautoberflache durch
Sauren. Betrachtungen uber die Funktionen des “Sauremantels”. Arch. f Dermat U Syph 1941; 182:
102–126.
21. Vermeer D. Method for determining neutralization of alkali by skin. Quoted in Yearbook: Dermat &
Syph, 1951; 415.
22. Wohnlich H. Zur Kohlehydratsynthese der Haut. Arch f. Derm u. Syph 1948; 187:53–60.
23. Spier H, Pascher G. Quantitative Untersuchungen uber die freien aminosauren der hautoberflache—
Zur frage Ihrer Genese. Klinische Wochenchrift. 1953; 997–1000.
Human Skin Buffering Capacity
219

=== Page 237 ===
24. Sharlit H, Sheer M. The hydrogen ion concentration of the surface on healthy intact skin. Arch Dermat
& Syph 1923; 7:592–598.
25. Piper H. Das Neutralisationsvermogen der haut gegenuber Laugen und seine Beziehung zur
Kohlensauteabgabe. Arch F Dermat U Syph 1943; 183:591–647.
26. Jacobi O. Uber die Reaktiosfagigkeit und das Neutralisationsvermogen der lebenden menschlichen
Haut. Dermat Wchnschr 1942; 115:733–741.
27. Lustig B, Perutz A. Ube rein einfaches Verfahren zur Bestimmung der Wasserstoffionenkonzentration
der normalen menschlichen Hautoberflache. Arch F Dermat U Syph 1930; 162:129–134.
28. Steinhardt J, Zaiser E. Combination of wool protein with cations and hydroxyl ions. J Biol Chem 1950;
183:789–802.
29. Green M, Behrendt H. Patterns of skin pH from birth to adolescence with a synopsis on skin growth.
Springfield Illinois: Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1971: 93–100.
30. Peterson LL, Wuepper KD. Epidermal and hair follicle transglutaminases and crosslinking in skin.
Mol Cell Biochem 1984; 58(1–2):99–111.
31. Steinhert P, Freedberg I. Molecular and cellular biology of Keratins. In: Goldsmith L. ed. Physiology
and Molecular Biology of the skin. 2nd ed. Oxford University Press, 1991: 113–147.
32. Arnold D. The self disinfecting power of skin. Am J Hyg 1934; 19:217–228.
33. Rothman S. pH of sweat and skin surface. In: Rothman S. ed. Physiology and Biochemistry of Skin.
University of Chicago Press; 1965:227–232.
34. Wilhelm P, Cua A, Maibach HI. Skin aging. Effect on TEWL, stratum corneum hydration, skin surface
pH, and casual sebum content. Arch Dermatol 1991; 127:1806–1809.
35. Schwindt D, Maibach HI. Cutaneous biometrics. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishing,
2000:110.
36. Szakall A. Uber die physiologie der obersten Hautschichten und ihre Bedeutung fur die
Alkaliresistenz. Arbeitsphysiol 1941; 11:436–452.
37. Szakall A. Die Veranderungen der obersten Hautschichten durch den Dauergebrauch einiger
Handwaschmittel. Arbeitsphysiol 1943; 13:49–56.
38. Rippke F, Schreiner V, Schwantiz H. The Acidic Milieu of the Horny Layer. Am J Clin Dermatol 2002;
3(4):261–272.
220
Levin and Maibach

=== Page 238 ===
21
Skin pH and Skin Flora
Shamim A. Ansari
Colgate-Palmolive Company, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
The skin being the largest organ covers the entire exterior of the body and thus forms a
protective barrier in between the human body and its environment. This tough and dry
exterior signifies the physical character of the skin. The uppermost layer of the skin is a
multilayered structure called the stratum corneum. The top three to five layers of stratum
corneum undergo progressive desquamation. The morphology and thickness of stratum
corneum is different at various body sites (1–3). The skin maintains characteristic
physicochemical features such as structure, hydration, temperature, pH, and oxygen and
carbon dioxide gradients. Changes in any of these factors impact the overall physiology of the
skin. The acidic nature of the skin was discovered by Heuss in 1892 (4) and was later validated
by Schade and Marchonini in 1928, (5) who underlined acidity as its protective feature and
called it the “acid mantle.” Current literature indicates that the skin surface pH is largely acidic
between 5.4 and 5.9 (6).
The skin surface pH plays an important role in skin physiology and directly or
indirectly influences various other factors such as composition of stratum corneum lipids,
stratum corneum hydration, barrier function of the skin, and the skin’s microbiota (7–15).
The acidic pH of skin provides optimal pH for enzymes, e.g., glucocerebrosidase (16) and
phospholipases (17), to work on extracellular lipids and a vitamin A–esterifying enzyme
(18). Conversely, acidic pH of the skin has also been shown to accelerate the repair process
of barrier function when damaged with acetone or extensive tapestripping (19). Also, the
acidic skin pH has been shown to correlate with enhanced resistance against sodium lauryl
sulfate (SLS)-induced irritant dermatitis (15,20).
An intraday variation (circadian rhythm) of skin pH was reported at some body sites,
e.g., shin, forearms, and axilla (21,22). The skin pH was higher (pH 5.3) in the afternoon and
lower (pH 4.9) at night (21–23). Investigations on seasonal differences in skin surface pH are
limited (24). During summer, the pH of the skin surface is usually 0.5 units below pH values
during the rest of the year (25).
Acidic pH of the skin is the result of the physiology of human body, which in turn
regulates endogenous skin flora (15,26,27). The skin further provides a habitat for resident
microbiota, which under normal conditions protects the skin from pathogenic organisms. Soon
after birth, bacteria start to colonize the skin and other body sites. Despite wide variations in
environmental conditions, the skin is capable of maintaining a stable microbial ecosystem (28).
The skin temperature tends to be cooler than normal body temperature, slightly acidic, and
mostly dry, whereas most bacteria prefer neutral pH, 378C temperature, and moisture for
optimal growth. Therefore, skin’s microenvironment greatly dictates the microbial spectrum
and population density. Some of the resident bacteria play an active role in maintaining acidic
pH of the skin and preventing colonization by pathogenic bacteria.
THE ORIGIN OF THE SKIN pH
It is now well accepted that the acid mantle of the stratum corneum is very important for
normal skin physiology and its bacterial flora. What makes the skin surface “acidic” is still not
fully understood (14). Many endogenous and exogenous factors have been proposed, which
influence the skin pH, e.g., eccrine and sebaceous secretions, anatomic sites, moisture, proton
pumps, genetic predispositions, and age (10,11,14). Active and passive energy, bioenergetic
processes, have also been suggested as sources for the acidic pH of the skin (11,29,30). For

=== Page 239 ===
example, lactic acid produced by passive process acidifies the superficial layers of skin (31).
Other important components of passive metabolic processes include free fatty acids,
cholesterol sulfate, urocanic acid, pyrrolidone carboxylic acid, which also contribute to the
skin’s acidic pH (32). Active proton pumps (e.g., the sodium/hydrogen anion exchanger
proteins or NHE1) present in the membranes of the lamellar bodies are responsible for
acidification of the intracellular space in the lower layers of stratum corneum (33). Free fatty
acids generated by lipases of bacterial and/or pilosebaceous origin are partly implicated in the
genesis of acid mantle (34).
The pores of the skin are made up of a combination of sebaceous and sudoriferous
glands. When in balance, the combined excretion of oil and sweat from these pores has a pH of
about 5.5. However, occlusive dressing has been shown to significantly increase the skin
surface pH, moisture content, and bacterial density (35), indicating the role of endogenous
factors in these changes. Exogenous factors such as skin cleansers, cosmetics, occlusive
treatments, and topical antibiotics/antiseptics have been shown to alter the skin surface pH
(36–39). Altered skin pH has been associated with dermatological conditions such as irritant
contact dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, ichthyosis, acne vulgaris, and Candida albicans infections
(31,40–42).
There could be many factors affecting the overall pH of the skin depending on the
subject, body sites, and other biochemical factors. The skin of newborns and small infants
differ from adults in some characteristics (43,44). The pH of infant skin is higher (e.g., 6.6 
0.25) than the adults (45–48). The pH of the skin differs at various anatomical sites, the
superficial pH on the nose was the lowest among the regions tested (49). Regions with higher
Staphylococcus epidermidis concentrations are slightly more acidic. In general, the skin surface
pH is relatively similar at different body sites; however, slightly higher pH was reported in
areas with higher moisture such as intertriginous areas (axillae, inguinal and submammary
folds, and finger webs) (6,14,50).
A slight person-to-person variation in skin pH occurs because not everyone’s skin is
exposed to the same conditions such as weather and harsh detergents. Recently, in a large
multicenter study, the skin surface pH of the volar forearm was assessed before and after
refraining from shower and cosmetic product application for 24 hours (15). The average pH
dropped from 5.12  0.56 to 4.93  0.45. The authors concluded that the “natural” skin pH is
on average 4.7, which is below the generally reported pH range between 5.0 and 6.0.
Interestingly, the study also suggested that showering with plain tap water in Europe, which
has a pH around 8.0, could increase the skin pH for >four hours. The skin surface pH not only
varied at different locations (Table 1), but also the lipid composition in the stratum corneum
differs as a function of skin region and could influence the pH profile across the stratum
corneum (51,52). Other reports (11,29,31,53,54) suggest that the pH of the skin follows a sharp
gradient across the stratum corneum, which is possibly involved in controlling enzymatic
actives and skin renewal (55).
Table 1
The pH Values on Human Skin at Various Locations as Reported in Selected Literature
Skin surface pH
Location
Reference
4.0–5.5
Forehead
50,59
4.0–5.5
Forehead and cheek
57
4.1–4.2
Forearm
62
4.4
Volar forearm
63
4.4–5.1
Volar forearm
64
4.5–5.6
Forehead
65
4.2–4.5
Forearm
65
5.5–5.8
Forehead
66
5.56–5.96
Back of the wrist
66
4.8–5.0
Volar forearm
67
4.93–5.12
Volar forearm
15
5.0–5.4
Volar forearm
68
5.0–5.5
Ventral forearm
30
5.4–5.9
Lower arm
6
5.5–5.8
Forearm
61
222
Ansari

=== Page 240 ===
AGE, RACE, AND GENDER DIFFERENCES
Reports on the differences and/or similarities in the skin surface pH among various age, race, and
gender are scanty. The newborn baby’s skin pH recorded to be neutral soon becomes acidic within
a month (56). The higher skin pH in infants is well documented (45–48) and may be associated
with different chemical composition of the skin lipids (44); however, within a month, the baby’s
skin attains an acidic pH similar to adult skin. The available literature on skin surface pH indicates
that the pH remains constant between 18 and 60 years of age (21,57,58). Men and women older
than 80 years showed increased pH values (57,59). In the older age group of over 70 years, the
mean pH value of the forehead was measured to be 5.6 as opposed to 5.3 in the younger age group
(59). Anatomical differences in pH have also been reported (Table 1), which also influence the
microbial composition and density (see later in the text and Table 3). In one of the studies (57),
among 89% of the subjects, the skin surface pH on the cheek was higher than that on the forehead.
In subjects younger than 80 years, the average pH is ranged between 4.0 and 5.5 on the forehead
and 4.2 to 5.9 on the cheek (57). In another study, facial pH at different sites did not differ
significantly between subjects with and without acne (60). Unlike in women, in men, the area close
to the wrist had significantly lower pH values compared with the proximal sites (61).
Skin pH has been reported to vary with race, gender, and genetic background. Black
people have a lower skin surface pH when compared with Caucasians (58,68), which has been
attributed to pigmentation effects (29). Gupta et al. 1987 (65) measured the skin surface pH of
55 brown-skinned Indians comprising of 30 males and 25 females in the age range 12 to
58 years. Indian skin was slightly more alkaline, though the data are not definitive because the
groups tested were small (65). The average pH values on the forehead of male and female were
5.51 and 5.73, respectively.
The differences between male and female skin surface pH have not been fully established.
Studies published to date show contradictory results (Table 2). In most studies, significantly more
acidic skin pH was found in men when compared with women (60,64,68–71), while other studies
(61) showed the reverse situation, i.e., more acidic pH for women rather than men, while others
showed no gender differences (21,57,58,61,72). A study conducted in India found that the male
skin was slightly but significantly more acidic than the female. The same study (65) reported that
the pH values at the axilla, umbilicus, palm, foot, sole, and cheek were consistently higher than
those at scalp, forehead, retroauricular and popliteal fossae, anterior arm, anterior forearm,
posterior neck, back, dorsum of hand, anterior leg, and anterior thigh. The highest pH was
recorded in axilla (5.98 for male and 6.00 for female). The study notes that high density of both
sweat glands and bacterial flora leads to a high skin pH, whereas lower pH was observed in area
with high concentration of sebaceous glands and bacterial flora.
In the underarm region, the skin surface pH is significantly different between men and
women, more acidic pH values were found in women than in men (71). The baseline pH value
before washing was 6.58  0.63 (right armpit) and 6.67  0.65 (left armpit) in men versus 5.8 
0.53 (right armpit) and 5.94  0.62 (left armpit) in women. Interestingly, washing of armpits
with pure tap water further increased the difference between male and female pH values (71).
The pH difference between right and left armpit was not statistically significant or (71) similar
to some earlier reports of no difference in skin pH between the dominant and nondominant
forearms or hands (61,62).
Table 2
Gender Differences in Skin pH
pH
Anatomical sites
Female
Male
Reference
Forehead
5.4–5.8
5.1–5.5
60
Forehead
5.73
5.51
66
Axilla
5.80–5.94
6.58–6.67
72
Volar forearm
4.8–5.8
4.3–4.7
53
Volar forearm
5.60–5.88
4.76–4.93
68
Volar forearm
4.97–6.09
5.44–6.16
61
Back of wrist
5.84
5.56
66
Back skin surface
5.43–5.73
4.96–5.12
22
Skin pH and Skin Flora
223

=== Page 241 ===
One of the prevalent hypotheses about the role of skin pH is its putative importance in
antimicrobial defense (63,73). Possible explanations are that (i) the top layer of the skin is very
dry and densely packed, which makes this first line of defense inhospitable to many bacteria;
(ii) salty secretions from sweat glands create an environment that is hyperosmotic and thus
unfavorable for bacteria; and (iii) normal flora grow best at a more acidic pH, whereas
pathogenic bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus, grow best at neutral pH (74). A more acidic
pH helps to protect skin against colonization by nonresident and pathogenic bacteria because
many of them survive well in a narrow pH range near neutral.
The acidic condition of the skin is caused by secretions from sweat glands, skin oil, and the
breakdown of fatty acids by S. epidermidis. Thus, a resident microflora is partly responsible for the
acidic pH of skin. A multicenter study also found that the acidic pH of the skin surface (4.0–4.5)
keeps the resident bacteria attached to the skin, whereas an alkaline pH (8,9) increased the
dispersal of bacteria from the skin (11,15,27). The importance of pH for antimicrobial function is
further supported by neonatal eczematous and atopic skin, which displays a neutral pH (41,75,76).
SKIN FLORA
The skin provides the largest organ (about 2 m2 skin surface in average human adult) and an
intricate habitat for a complex microbial ecosystem comprising resident and transient microflora,
mainly bacteria (77,78), to a lesser extent fungal and possibly viral agents. Bacteria-skin
relationship can be commensal, symbiotic, or parasitic relative to the host’s overall physical and
immune status. Persistant colonization is the result of alterations in the host’s immune status,
resulting in a significant impact on the balance of the bacteria-skin relationship.
The acid mantle, level of mineral and moisture, and use of skin cleansers and cosmetics
influence the growth and maintenance of resident flora; and the state of resident flora influence
the acquisition of transient bacteria (77). This acid mantle, a fine film with a slightly acidic pH
on the surface of the skin, provides a protective barrier to the skin. The microbial population
dynamics on various parts of the skin is determined by the anatomical location, the amount of
sebum and sweat production, local pH, humidity, temperature, light exposure, etc. (71,79).
Host factors such as age, immune status, hormonal status, and other habits also influence the
composition and density of the skin flora (80,81). The development of bacterial flora on skin
from birth to adulthood has not been systematically studied. During the prenatal stage, the
skin remains sterile but soon becomes colonized by bacteria after birth. Not all bacteria are
welcomed onto the skin. The skin allows the colonization and growth of those bacteria, which
protect the host from pathogenic bacteria both directly and indirectly. These bacteria can act by
producing antibiotics (e.g., bacteriocin), toxic metabolites, inducing a low reduction-oxidation
potential, depleting essential nutrients, preventing attachment of competing bacteria,
inhibiting translocation, by degrading toxins, etc (81,82).
Microbial status on skin can be temporary or transient, short-term resident and long-term
resident biota. Establishment of a resident status depends on the ability of the bacteria to adhere to
the skin epithelium, grow in a relatively dry and acidic environment, and establish a relationship
that is more mutualistic than commensalistic (11,15,82). Bacterial adhesion or detachment from the
skin could be mediated by (i) specific interactions via lectin or sugar binding; (ii) hydrophobic
interactions; and (iii) electrostatic interactions (83,84). Hand washing with a skin cleanser containing
microbial anti-attachment ingredients has also been shown to prevent bacterial adherence to skin,
which may be working via electrostatic interaction (85, unpublished data). Recently, using 1% lactic
acid (pH 3.0) and 1% sodium carbonate decahydrate (pH 11.0) under acidic conditions, the dispersal
rate of the resident bacteria from volar forearm was much lower than under alkaline conditions,
suggesting the role of electrostatic interaction between bacteria and positive charges of the skin
under acidic pH. The differences in dispersal rate under acidic and alkaline pH have not been fully
understood. Various explanations (15) are put forward for high dispersal rate under alkaline
condition: (i) Under alkaline conditions both keratines and the bacterial surfaces are negatively
charged resulting in repulsion. (ii) Net negative charge of the keratins created by alkaline treatment
would lead to the swelling of the skin, which may open up the sponge-like corneocytes, allowing the
bacteria to diffuse to the surface. A laboratory-based study has shown that washing hands with plain
soap spreads bacteria on the entire hands (personal observation). It has also been reported that
repeated washing could not diminish numbers of bacteria (86); therefore, the practice of rigorous
preoperative washing of the hands in hospitals has been questioned (87,88). Because of the inefficacy
224
Ansari

=== Page 242 ===
of washing regimens, especially in health care settings, selection of an effective skin cleanser for
routine hand hygiene is very important (88,89).
Bacterial species commonly isolated from normal skin include Staphylococcus, Micrococcus,
Corynebacterium, Brevibacteria, Propionibacteria, and Acinetobacter (79,81,90,91). S. aureus, Streptococcus
pyogenes, Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are transient colonizers (91,92). The gram-
negative bacteria are the minor constituents of the normal skin flora, and Acinetobacter is one of the
few gram-negative bacteria commonly found on skin. The presence of E. coli on the skin surface is
indicative of fecal contamination. Yeasts are uncommon on the skin surface, but the lipophilic
yeast Pityrosporum ovalis is occasionally found on the scalp. Racial and gender differences in skin
microflora are not fully examined (93). A more recent study using molecular techniques has
provided better understanding on microbial ecology of the skin (94). Gao et al. (94), using
molecular techniques, have identified 182 species of bacteria on human forearm skin, of which 8%
were unknown species that had never been described before (94). This study also shed some light
on the gender differences of skin microbiota, the microbial mix, and the possible role of pH (61).
Roughly, half of the bacteria identified in the samples represented the genera of Propionibacteria,
Corynebacteria, Staphylococcus, and Streptococcus, which are generally considered as the resident
flora of human skin. Among the six individuals sampled, only four species of bacteria were in
common: Propionibacterium acnes, Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum, Streptococcus mitis, and
Finegoldia AB109769. Interestingly, three bacterial species were found only in the male subjects:
Propionibacterium granulosum, Corynebacterium singulare, and Corynebacterium appendixes (95).
The skin surface pH influences various factors for the growth of resident and pathological
microorganisms (7,11,71,95). The acidic pH of the skin is regarded as one of the major factors in
making the skin a less favorable habitat for bacteria (96). A high density of bacteria was found in
skin area with less acidic pH such as genitocrural area, anal regions, toe webs, submammary fold,
and axillae (55,71). Those areas of the skin, which are relatively dry and exposed, have lower pH
and lower microbial population density as well. For example, volar forearm skin has bacterial
population about 102 to 103 cfu/cm2 (colonies forming units/cm2) (63), compared with 105 cfu/cm2
in relatively moist underarms area (78). Artificial occlusion of the forearm skin leads to
significant changes in skin pH and in the composition and density of bacterial species (35,63).
For example, before occlusion, the skin pH value was 4.38, and after five days of occlusion, the
pH increased to 7.05 (63). Similarly, the average bacterial count before occlusion was 1.8  102
cfu/cm2, which increased to 4.5  106 cfu/cm2 on the fifth day (63). It is evident that moist skin
environment promotes bacterial growth and colonization. The distribution and composition of
bacterial species on the skin vary at different body sites (Table 3). In intratrigenous area, the
skin surface pH is somewhat higher, which in turn favors higher bacterial density (90,91).
Table 3
Normal Skin Microflora in Areas with High Density
Bacteria
Area
S. epidermidis
Upper trunk
S. hominis
Glaborous skin
S. capitis
Head
S. saccharolyticus
Forehead/antecubital
S. saprophyticus
Perineum
M. crococcus luteus
Forearm
Corynebacterium xerosis
Axilla, conjuctiva
C. minutissimum
Intertriginous (e.g., axilla)
C. jeikeium
Intertriginous (e.g., axilla)
P. acnes
Sebaceous gland, forehead
P. granulosum
Sebaceous gland, forehead, axilla
P. avidum
Axilla
Brevibacterium spp.
Axilla, toe webs
Dermabacter spp.
Forearm
Acinetobacter spp.
Dry area
Pityrosporum spp.
Uppermost part of sebaceous gland follicle
Abbreviations: S. epidermidis, Staphylococcus epidermidis; S. hominis, Staphylococcus
hominis; S. capitis, Staphylococcus capitis; S. saccharolyticus, Staphylococcus saccharolyti-
cus; S. Saprophyticus, Staphylococcus saprophyticus; C. minutissimum, Corynebacterium
minutissimum; C. jeikeium, Corynebacterium jeikeium; P. acnes, Propionibacterium acnes;
P. granulosum, Propionibacterium granulosum; P. avidum, Propionibacterium avidum.
Skin pH and Skin Flora
225

=== Page 243 ===
The normal flora also acts as a barrier to prevent invasion and growth of pathogenic
bacteria (34,97). The relevance of normal skin flora as a defensive barrier can be articulated
with the finding that intensive use of antimicrobial skin cleansers could lead to an increased
susceptibility to skin infections by gram-negative bacteria (98–100). A healthy growth and
maintenance of the resident bacteria effectively deny the colonization by transient bacteria
(e.g., E. coli, Pseudomonas, coagulase positive S. aureus, C. albicans). The skin’s antimicrobial
defenses include the mechanical rigidity of the stratum corneum, its low moisture content,
stratum corneum lipids, lysozyme, acidity (pH 5), and defensins (29,101–103). Recent studies
suggest that increased enzyme activity of phospholipase A2 is related to the formation of the
acid mantle in the stratum corneum (29,31).
PROTECTIVE ROLE OF ACIDIC pH OF THE SKIN
Besides other physicochemical roles of the skin pH, it is now generally accepted that the
normal skin surface pH has a beneficial role in relation to skin microflora (Table 4). Acidic pH
of the skin (pH 4.0–4.5) helps the resident bacterial flora to remain attached to the skin and
prevents cutaneous invasion by pathogenic microorganisms (7,8,15), whereas alkaline pH (8.0–
9.0) is reported to promote dispersal of the bacteria (15). Acids produced by bacteria also
contribute to the local protective mechanisms. For example, S. epidermidis, P. acnes,
Pityrosporum ovale, and Corynebacteria produce lipases and esterases that break triglycerides
to free fatty acids, leading to a lower skin surface pH and thereby creating an unfavorable
environment for skin pathogens. Acidic pH of the skin also facilitates the production of natural
antimicrobial peptides, attributes to the wound healing, and regulates the keratinization and
desquamation processes (9,53,104–108). The skin flora also produces proteinaceous or lipidic
antibacterial compounds termed “bacteriocins.” These bacteriocins are involved in control-
ling/regulating bacterial competition for survival in this microenvironment. For example, a
bacteriocin-Pep 5 produced by S. epidermidis is particularly active against other staphylococci,
specifically S. aureus (109). Interestingly, the acidic pH of the skin boosts the activity of these
antibacterial lipids and peptides possibly by enhancing the interaction with the bacterial
membrane (26,105,108,109).
EFFECTS OF THE SKIN pH ON SKIN FLORA AND PATHOLOGY
Cutaneous pH plays an important role in maintaining the normal bacterial flora of the skin and
preventing cutaneous invasion by pathogens (26,110). The acidic pH of the skin surface has
long been regarded as the result of exocrine secretions of the skin glands, which in turn is
involved in regulating the skin flora. Furthermore, a number of recent investigations published
on the pH gradients in deeper layers of skin indicate a close relationship among the barrier
function, a normal maturation of stratum corneum, and desquamation. Initially, work done in
test tubes clearly demonstrated the effect of pH on bacterial growth (111,112). The study found
that S. aureus grew equally well at pH 5, 6, and 7; normal micrococci showed somewhat, but
Table 4
Effects of Skin pH on Skin Microflora
Effects
Reference
Acidic pH (4–4.5) keeps the resident flora attached to the skin.
15
Alkaline pH (8,9) promotes dispersal of bacteria from the skin.
Less acidic pH promotes bacterial growth, especially gram-negative bacteria and
propionibacteria.
63,74
Skin candidal infection was more inflammatory when the SC was buffered to pH 6.0
versus 4.5, indicating that pH may mediate immune reaction to infections.
113
High pH in the axilla promotes high bacterial growth and malodor.
114
Acidic pH boosts the activity of antibacterial lipids and peptides.
26,104,107,108
Acidic pH facilitates production of natural antimicrobial peptides, wound healing, and
regulating keratinization and desquamation processes.
9,53,105,106,107
Abbreviation: SC, stratum corneum
226
Ansari

=== Page 244 ===
not significantly, better growth at pH 6 and 7 than at pH 5. On the other hand, aerobic
diphtheroids grew significantly better at pH 7 than at lower pH levels (113). The acidic pH of
skin provides a balanced environment for the resident bacteria. Changes in the skin pH and
other organic factors play a role in certain skin pathogenesis and in their prevention and
treatment (Table 4).
P. acnes is a classical example of how a slight increase in the skin pH can facilitate the
resident bacteria to become pathogenic. Under normal pH of 5.5, growth of P. acnes is at its
minimum; however, a slight shift toward alkaline pH would make it a more favorable
environment, resulting in increased growth of this organism (112,115). As mentioned earlier,
prolonged occlusion of skin significantly affects the growth of the normal skin flora, skin pH,
and the rate of transepidermal water loss (TEWL) and carbon dioxide emission (35,63).
Recent studies have shown the relationship between a change in skin pH and its
consequences in atopic dermatitis, particularly disturbances in skin barrier function and
increased colonization with S. aureus (116). However, other studies (105,117) have suggested
that in atopic dermatitis, increased colonization by S. aureus and other bacteria could be
associated with a decrease in sphingosine and ceramide production. In atopic eczema, not only
the skin surface pH was significantly higher than in normal healthy skin (41,118) but also the
growth of S. aureus and exotoxin production were increased, which have been shown to induce
eczema on intact skin (119).
Changes in the skin pH from acidic to alkaline could also be a risk factor for the
development of candidal infections (113). A laboratory-based study, where right and left
forearms were respectively buffered at pH 6.0 and 4.5, inoculated with a suspension of
C. albicans and occluded for 24 hours showed more pronounced skin lesions with the higher
pH suggesting that the higher pH may increase yeast virulence and/or modulate the host’s
defence capability (66). Yosipovitch et al. (67) found that the pH values in the intertrigenous
skin among 50 noninsulin-dependent diabetic patients were significantly higher than in
normal healthy volunteers and attributed the higher pH as a risk factor for candidal infection
(66). Patients on dialysis also showed significant increase in their skin surface pH.
In a moist intertrigenous area, such as axilla, the pH is physiologically higher than in
other skin regions (78,90,114), which promotes the growth of local flora. It has been established
that underarm odor is created by the action of indigenous bacteria on axillary apocrine gland
secretions (78, personal observations). Application of a deodorant product showed significant
reduction in axillary pH, which in turn inhibited the growth of underarm bacteria (114).
EFFECTS OF SKIN CLEANSERS AND COSMETICS ON SKIN pH AND FLORA
As mentioned earlier, there are many external factors that influence the skin surface pH. Some
of the external factors include the use of soap, detergents, and cosmetic products. Long-term
use of these agents has been shown to alter the skin surface pH and to some extent affect the
skin microflora at least for a short duration (37,114,120). Alterations in skin pH could cause
irritation or interfere with the keratinization process as well (11,121).
Frequent hand washing with soap may damage the skin and facilitate more bacterial
colonization. In fact, water and soap washing of damaged skin were not effective in reducing
the bacterial contamination (122). Use of an alkaline soap with pH 10.5 to 11.0 resulted in
higher skin surface pH and marked increase in the number of Propionibacteria, but the counts of
coagulase negative Staphylococci were not much changed (48,96). In acne-prone young adults,
washing of facial skin with an alkaline cleansing agent was reported to cause more
inflammatory reaction than the acidic syndet bar (42). On the other hand, washing with an
acidic skin cleanser (pH of 5.5) similar to the normal skin pH in adults increased the skin
surface pH but significantly less than the alkaline soap (48,74,98,123). At the forehead, there
was a clear correlation between bacterial counts and the skin pH, both with Propionibacteria and
Staphylococci, but on the forearm only Propionibacteria count was higher with higher pH. The
skin surface pH was significantly higher when neutral preparations were used. The number of
Propionibacteria was significantly linked to the skin pH (74). The use of synthetic detergents
with pH similar to the skin surface pH led to a rise in the skin surface pH for a shorter duration
(36,42), and such temporary changes in skin pH were limited to the top layers of the stratum
corneum (55).
Skin pH and Skin Flora
227

=== Page 245 ===
Korting et al. (96) were among the first to examine the effect of different skin cleansing
treatments on the bacterial flora and the skin surface pH in healthy volunteers (37,96) using a
crossover clinical design. Essentially, volunteers in one group washed their foreheads and
forearm with an alkaline soap twice daily for one minute and those in the other group used an
acidic soap (syndet). After four weeks, both groups switch their soaps, respectively, in a
crossover fashion. The skin pH and bacterial density were determined at the beginning of the
study and at the end of every week (96). The pH was increased when alkaline soap was used
first and the pH dropped with the changeover to syndet. When syndet was used first, the pH
dropped slightly, and then increased when alkaline soap was used. Long-term use of syndet
lowered the skin pH by about 0.3 units. In general, washing with alkaline soap resulted in an
increase in skin pH and a marked increase in Propionibacteria without any significant change in
counts of coagulase negative Staphylococci.
A more recent study found the natural skin surface pH below 5, which is on the lower
end of many studies reported to date in the literature (15). They assessed the pH on volar
forearm before and after refraining from shower and using any cosmetic products on skin for
24 hours. The baseline pH before taking shower was 5.12  0.56. After 24 hours without any
product application or contact with water, the pH value dropped to 4.93  0.45. On average,
the authors estimated that the natural pH value of the volar forearm skin to be 4.7 (15), which
is in contrast to general assumption that the average skin pH ranges between 5.0 and 6.0.
Interestingly, the study also found that plain tap water with pH around 8.0 as generally found
in Europe could increase the skin pH up to six hours after application.
CONCLUSION
Since the first report in 1892 by Heuss (4) on the acidic nature of the skin, significant progress has
been made in the field of skin biochemistry/microbiology, yet a number of areas remain to be fully
explored. The exact origin of the skin acidity is still being investigated, but recent studies appear to
indicate that several endogenous factors, including the presence of lactic acid, free fatty acids,
urocanic acid, pyrrolidone carboxylic acid in sweat and sebaceous secretions are involved. The
skin is the primary organ protecting the human body from external physical and chemical
assaults. Overall, the skin surface is acidic with subtle differences between race and gender. It is
not yet clear whether the skin has an inherently acidic pH that provides a hospitable environment
for certain organisms or whether the organisms are attracted by other factors to colonize the skin.
A recent study on human forearm superficial bacterial flora using molecular techniques
highlighted the subtle differences in skin bacteria between men and women and possible relation
with the skin pH (94), and suggested the need for further studies including host-and site
specificities of the bacterial species on skin and their role (if any) in the pathogenesis of skin
diseases. The acidic pH of the skin provides an optimal environment for resident bacteria and their
enzymatic activities. Together, the acidic pH of the skin and the resident flora of the skin play an
important role in maintaining skin health. The acidic pH of the skin is a key factor in the barrier
function (14,19) and plays a key role in the mutualistic relationship with resident microflora
(80,124–126). It is well recognized that an increased skin surface pH may be associated with the
pathogenesis or the severity of many skin disorders, including acute eczema, irritant contact
dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, ichthyosis, acne vulgaris, and C. albicans infections (11,20,26). It is
becoming more evident that the repeated use of alkaline skin cleansing products, detergents, and
even hard water (pH 8.0) can adversely affect the natural skin pH and disturb the normal flora. To
maintain the normal physiology and microflora of the skin, use of cosmetics and skin cleansing
products, which do not alter the skin pH or adversely affect the skin flora should be considered.
Additionally, more research on pre- and probiotics in regulating healthy skin flora and
maintaining optimal skin biochemistry is needed.
REFERENCES
1. Bissett DL. Anatomy and biochemistry of the skin. In: Kydonieus AF, Berner B, eds. Transdermal
Delivery of Drugs, Vol 1. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1987:29–42.
2. Plewig G, Marples RR. Regional differences of cell sizes in the human stratum corneum. I. J Invest
Dermatol 1970; 54:13–18.
228
Ansari

=== Page 246 ===
3. Schwindt DA, Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Water diffusion characteristics of human stratum corneum
at different anatomical sites in vivo. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111:385–389.
4. Heuss E. Die reaction des Schweiss beim geunden Menschen. Monatschr Orakt Dermatol 1892;
14:343.
5. Schade H, Marchionini A. Der Sa¨uremantel der haut nach Gasketten-messungen. Klin Wochenschr
1928; 7:12–14.
6. Braun-Falco O, Korting HC. Der nromale pH-Wert der Haut. Hautarzt 1986; 37:126–129.
7. Korting HC, Lukacs A, Vogt N, et al. Influence of the pH value on the growth of S. epidermidis,
S. aureus and Propionibacterium acnes in continuous culture. Zentralblatt fur Hygiene und
Umwetmedizin (Stuttgart) 1992; 193:78–90.
8. Schmid-Wendtner MH, Korting HC. The concept of the acid mantle of the skin: its relevance for the
choice of skin cleansers. Dermatol 1995; 191:276–280.
9. Mauro T, Grayson S, Gao WN, et al. Barrier recovery is impeded at neutral pH, independent of ionic
effects: implications for extracellular lipid processing. Arch. Dermatol Res 1998; 290:215–222.
10. Behne MJ, Meyer JW, Hanson KM, et al. NHE 1 regulates the stratum corneum permeability barrier
homeostasis: microenvironment acidification assessed with fluorescence life lifetime imaging. J Biol
Chem 2002; 277:47399–47406.
11. Rippke F, Schriener V, Schwantiz H-J. The acidic milieu of the horny layer: new findings on the
physiology and pathophysiology of skin. Am J Clin Dermatol 2002; 3:261–272.
12. Sznitowska M, Janicki S, Williams A, et al. pH-induced modifications to stratum corneum lipids
investigated using thermal, spectroscopic, and chromatographic techniques. J Pharm Sci 2003; 92:173–179.
13. Fluhr JW, Behne MJ, Brown BE, et al. Stratum corneum acidification in neonatal skin: Secretory
phospholipase A2 and the sodium/hydrogen antiporter-1 acidify neonatal rat stratum corneum.
J Invest Dermatol 2004; 122:320–329.
14. Schmid-Wendtner MH, Korting HC. The pH of the skin surface and its impact on the barrier
function. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2006; 19:296–302.
15. Lambers H, Piessens S, Bloem A, et al. Natural skin surface pH is on average below 5, which is
beneficial for its resident flora. Int J Cosmetic Sci 2006; 28:359–370.
16. Takagi Y, Kriehuber E, Imokawa G, et al. Beta-glucocerebrosidase activity in mammalian stratum
corneum. J Lip Res 1999; 40:861–869.
17. Frienkel RK, Traczyk TN. The phospholipases A of epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 1980; 74:169–173.
18. O¨ hman H, Vahlquist A. In vivo studies concerning a pH gradient in human stratum corneum and
upper epidermis. Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 1993; 74:375–379.
19. Hachem J-P, Crumrine D, Fluhr J, et al. pH directly regulates epidermal permeability barrier
homeostatsis, and stratum corneum cohesion/integrity. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 121:345–353.
20. Wilhelm KP, Cua AB, Maibach HI. Skin aging: effect of transepidermal water loss, stratum corneum
hydration, skin surface pH, and casual sebum content. Arch Dermatol 1991; 127:1806–1809.
21. Burry J, Coulson HF, Roberts G. Circadian rhythms in axillary skin surface pH. Int J Cosmet Sci 2001;
23:207–210.
22. Yosipovitch G, Xiong GL, Haus E, et al. Time-dependent variations of the skin barrier function in
humans: transepidermal water loss, stratum corneum hydration, skin surface pH and skin
temperature. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 110:20–23.
23. Yosipovitch G. Circadian rhythms of the skin. Cosmet Toil 1999; 114:45–47.
24. Takashi A, Mayuzumi J, Kikuchi N, et al. Seasonal variations in skin temperature, skin pH,
evaporative water loss and skin surface lipid values on human skin. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 1980;
28:387–392.
25. Abe T, Mayuzumi J, Kikuchi N, et al. Seasonal variations in skin temperature, skin pH, evaporative
water loss and skin surface lipid values on human skin. Chem Pharm Bull 1980; 28:387–392.
26. Chikakane K, Takahashi H. Measurement of skin pH and its significance in cutaneous diseases. Clin
Dermatol 1995; 13:299–306.
27. Noble WC. Physical factors affecting skin flora and disease. In: Noble WC, ed. The Skin Microflora
and Microbial Skin Disease. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993:78–81.
28. Fredricks DN. Microbial ecology of human skin in health and disease. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc
2001; 6:167–169.
29. Fluhr JW, Kao J, Jain M, et al. Generation of free fatty acids from phospholipids regulates stratum
corneum acidification and integrity. J Invest. Dermatol 2001; 117:44–51.
30. Fluhr JW, Elias PM. Stratum corneum pH: formation and function of the ‘acid mantle’. Exog
Dermatol 2002; 1:163–175.
31. O¨ hman H, Vahlquist A. The pH gradient over the stratum corneum differs in X-linked recessive and
autosomal dominant ichthyosis: a clue to the molecular origin of the “acid skin mantle”? J Invest
Dermatol 1998; 111:674–677.
32. Krien PM, Kermici M. Evidence for the existence of a self regulated enzymatic process within the
human stratum corneum—an unexpected role for urocanic acid. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 115:414–420.
Skin pH and Skin Flora
229

=== Page 247 ===
33. Behne MJ, Meyer JW, Hanson KM, et al. Functional role of sodium-hydrogen antiporter NHE1.
J Invest Dermatol 2000; 114:797.
34. Puhvel SM, Reisner RM, Amirian DA. Quantification of bacteria in isolated pilosebaceous follicles in
normal skin. J Invest Dermatol 1975; 65:525–531.
35. Hartman AA. Effect of occlusion on resident flora skin moisture and skin pH. Arch Dermatol 1983;
275:251–254.
36. Barel AO, Lambrecht R, Clarys P, et al. A comparative study of the effects on the skin of a classical
bar soap and a syndet cleansing bar in normal use conditions and in soap chamber test. Skin Res
Technol 2001; 7:98–104.
37. Korting HC, Megele M, Mehringer L, et al. Influence of skin cleansing preparation acidity on skin
surface properties. Int J Cosmet Sci 1991; 13:91–102.
38. Forsch PJ, Kligman AM. The soap chamber test. A new method for assessing the irritancy of soaps.
J Am Acad Dermatol 1979; 1:35–41.
39. Murahatta RI, Aronson MP. The relationship between solution pH and chemical irritancy for
carboxylic acid-based personal washing products. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1994; 45:239–246.
40. Seidenari S, Giust G. Objective assessment of the skin of children affected by atopic dermatitis: a
study of pH, capacitance and TEWL. Acta Derm Venereol 1995; 75:429–433.
41. Sparavigna A, Setaro M, Gualandri V. Cutaneous pH in children affected by atopic dermatitis and in
healthy children: a multi-center study. Skin Res Technol 1999; 5:221–227.
42. Korting HC, Bruan-Falco O. The effect of detergents on skin pH and its consequences. Clin Dermatol
1996; 14:23–27.
43. Solomon LM, Esterly NB. Neonatal dermatology. The newborn skin. J Pediatr 1970; 77:888–894.
44. Ramasastry P, Downing DT, Pochi PE, et al. Chemical composition of human skin lipids from birth
to puberty. J Invest Dermatol 1970; 54:139–144.
45. Beare JM, Cheeseman EA, Gailey AAH, et al. The pH of skin surface of infants aged one to seven
days. Br J Dermatol 1959; 71:165–180.
46. Beare JM, Cheeseman EA, Gailey AAH, et al. The effect of age on the pH of skin surface in the first
week of life. Br J Dermatol 1960; 72:62–66.
47. Behrendt H, Green M. Skin pH pattern in the newborn infant. J Dis Child 1958; 95:35–41.
48. Gfatter R, Hackl P, Braun F. Effects of soap and detergents on skin surface pH, stratum corneum
hydration and fat content in infants. Dermatol 1997; 195:258–262.
49. Kobayashi H, Tagami H. Distinct differences observable in biophysical functions of the facial skin:
with special emphasis on the poor functional properties of the stratum corneum of the perioral
region. Int J Cos Sci 2004; 26(2):91–101.
50. Dikstein S, Zlotogorski A. Skin surface hydrogen ion concentration (pH). In: Le´veˆque JL, ed.
Cutaneous Investigation in Health and Disease. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1989:59–77.
51. Lampe MA, Burlingame AL, Whitney JA, et al. Human stratum corneum lipids: characterization and
regional variation. J Lipid Res 1983; 24:120–130.
52. Coderch L, Lo´pez O, de la Maza A, et al. Ceramides and skin function. Am J Clin Dermatol 2003;
4:107–129.
53. O¨ hman H, Vahlquist A. In vitro studies concerning a pH gradient in human stratum corneum and
upper epidermis. Acta Derm Venereol 1994; 74:375–379.
54. Turner NG, Cullander C, Guy RH. Determination of pH gradient across the stratum corneum.
J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 1998; 3:110–113.
55. Parra JL, Paye M. EEMCO guidance for the in vivo assessment of skin surface pH. Skin Pharmacol
Appl Skin Physiol 2003; 16:188–202.
56. Yosipovitch G, Maayan-Metzger A, Merlob P, et al. Skin barrier properties in different body areas in
neonates. Pediatrics 2000; 106:105–108.
57. Zlotogorski A. Distribution of the skin surface pH on the forehead and cheek of adults. Arch
Dermatol Res 1987; 279:398–401.
58. Hillebrand GG, Levine MJ, Miyamato K. The age-dependent changes in skin condition in African
Americans, East Asians, and Latinos. IFFSC Magazine 2001; 4:259–266.
59. Dikstein S, Zlotogorsky A. Measurement of skin pH. Acta Derm Venereol 1994; 185:18–20.
60. Kim MK, Patel RA, Shinn AH, et al. Comparison of sebum secretion, skin type, pH in humans with
and without acne. Arch Dermatol 2006; 298:113–119.
61. Ehlers C, Ivens UI, Moller ML, et al. Females have lower skin surface pH than men. A study on the
influence of gender, forearm site variation, right/left difference and time of the day on the skin
surface pH. Skin Res Technol 2001; 7:90–94.
62. Treffel P, Panisset F, Faiver B, et al. Hydration, transepidermal water loss, pH and skin surface
parameters: correlations and variations between dominant and nondominant forearms. Br J
Dermatol 1994; 130:325–328.
63. Aly R, Shirley C, Cunico B, et al. Effect of prolonged occlusion on the microbial flora, pH, carbon
dioxide and transepidermal water loss on human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1978; 71:378–381.
230
Ansari

=== Page 248 ===
64. Blank IH. Measurement of pH of the skin surface: I and II. J Invest Dermatol 1939; 2:67–69.
65. Gupta AB, Tripathi TP, Haldar B. Surface pH of normal skin. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol
1987; 53:19–21.
66. Berardesca E, Pirot F, Singh M, et al. Differences in stratum corneum pH gradient when comparing
white Caucasian and Black African-American skin. Br J Dermatol 1998; 139:855–857.
67. Yosipovitch G, Tur E, Morduchowitz G, et al. Skin surface pH, moisture, and pruritis in
haemodialysis patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1993; 8:1129–1132.
68. Turek BA, Dikstein S. Skin pH—workshop report from the fourth international symposium of
bioengineering and the skin. Bioeng Skin 1985; 1:57–58.
69. Kim MK, Patel RA, Shinn AH, et al. Evaluation of gender difference in skin type and pH. J Dermatol
Sci 2006; 41:153–156.
70. Jacobi U, Gautier J, Sterry W, et al. Gender-related differences in the physiology of the stratum
corneum. Dermatol 2005; 211:312–317.
71. Williams S, Davids M, Reuther T, et al. Gender difference of in vivo skin surface pH in the axilla and the
effect of a standardized washing procedure with tap water. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2005; 18:247–252.
72. Zlotogorsky A, Dikstein S. Measurement of skin surface pH. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, eds. Handbook
of Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995:22–225.
73. Elias P. Stratum corneum defensive functions: an integrated view. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 125:183–200.
74. Korting HC, Hubner K, Greiner K, et al. Differences in skin pH and bacterial microflora due to long-
term application of synthetic detergent preparations of pH 5.5 and pH 7.0. Acta Dermatol Venereol
Stockh 1990; 70:429–457.
75. Visscher MO, Chatterjee R, Munson KA, et al. Changes in diapered and nondiapered infant skin
over the first month of life. Pediatr Dermatol 2000; 17:45–51.
76. Giusti F, Martella A, Bertoni L, et al. Skin barrier, hydration, and pH of the skin of infants under
2 years of age. Pediatr Dermatol 2001; 18:93–96.
77. Holland KT, Bojar RA. Cosmetics: what is their influence on the skin microflora? Am J Clin Dermatol
2002; 3:445–449.
78. Leyden J, McGinley K, Hoelzle E, et al. The microbiology of the human axilla and its relationship to
axillary odor. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 77:413–416.
79. Aly R. Cutaneous microbiology. In: Orkin M, Maibach HI, Dahl MV, eds. Dermatology. Los Altos:
Appleton & Lange, 1991:22–25.
80. Feingold DS. Bacterial adherence, colonization, and pathogenicity. Arch Dermatol 1986; 122:161–163.
81. Roth RR, James WD. Microbial ecology of the skin. Ann Rev Microbiol 1988; 42:441–464.
82. Chiller K, Slekin BA, Murakawa GJ. Skin microflora and bacterial infections of the skin. J Invest
Dermatol Symp Proc 2001; 6:170–174.
83. Costerton JW, Geesey GG, Cheng KJ. How bacteria stick. Sci Am 1978; 238:86–95.
84. Ofek I, Beachy EH. General concepts and principles of bacteria adherence in animals and man. In:
Beachy EH, ed. Bacterial Adherence. London: Chapman and Hall, 1980:3–29.
85. Ansari S, Scala D, Kaplan S, et al. A novel skin cleansing technology that reduces bacterial
attachment to the skin. Poster Abstract, 102nd General Meeting of the American Society for
Microbiology, Salt Lake City, UT, May 19–23, 2002.
86. Beetz HM. Depth distribution of skin bacteria in the stratum corneum. Arch Dermatol Forsch 1972;
244:76–80.
87. Ojajarvi J. Effectiveness of hand washing and disinfection methods in removing transient bacteria
after patient nursing. J Hyg 1980; 85:193–203.
88. Ojajarvi J. The importance of soap selection for routine hand hygiene in hospital. J Hyg 1981; 86:275–283.
89. Ansari SA, Springthorpe VS, Sattar SA, et al. In vivo protocol for testing efficacy of hand-washing
agents against viruses and bacteria: experiments with rotavirus and Escherichia coli. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1989; 55:3113–3118.
90. Marples RR. The effect of hydration on bacterial flora of the kin. In: Miabach HI, Hildick-Smith G,
eds. Skin Bacteria and their Role in Infection. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1965:33–41.
91. Noble WC. Observations on the surface flora of the skin and on skin pH. Br J Dermatol 1968; 80:279–281.
92. Akiama H, Morizane, Yamazaki O, et al. Assessment of Streptococcus pyogenes microcolony formation
in infected skin by confocal microscopy. J Dermatol Sci 2003; 32:193–199.
93. Wesley NO, Maibach HI. Racial (ethnic) differences in skin properties: the objective data. Am J Clin
Derm 2003; 4:843–860.
94. Gao Z, Tseng C-H, Pei Z, et al. Molecular analysis of human forearm superficial skin bacterial biota.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 2007; 104:2927–2932.
95. Behne MJ, Barry NP, Hanson KM, et al. Neonatal development of the stratum corneum pH gradient:
localization and mechanisms leading to emergence of optimal barrier function. J Invest Dermatol
2003; 120:998–1006.
96. Korting HC, Jober M, Mueller M, et al. Influence of repeated washings with soap and synthetic detergents
on pH and resident flora of the skin on forehead and forearm. Acta Derm Venereol 1987; 67:41–47.
Skin pH and Skin Flora
231

=== Page 249 ===
97. Aly R, Maibach HI, Rahman R, et al. Correlation of human in vivo and in vitro cutaneous
antimicrobial factors. J Infect Dis 1975; 131:579–583.
98. Sullivan A, Edlund C, Nord CE. Effects of antimicrobial agents on the ecological balance of human
microflora. Lancet Infect Dis 2001; 1:101–114.
99. Forfar JO, Gould JC, MacCabe AF. Effect of hexachlorophene on incidence of staphylococcal and
gram-negative infection in the newborn. Lancet 1968; ii:177–180.
100. Light IJ, Sutherland JM, Cochran ML, et al. Ecologic relation between Staphylococcus aureus and
Pseudomonas in a nursery population. N Engl J Med 1968; 278:1243–1247.
101. Elias PM, Menon GK. Structural and lipid biochemical correlates of the epidermal permeability
barrier. Adv Lipid Res 1991; 24:1–26.
102. Harder J, Bartels J, Christophers E, et al. A peptide antibiotic from human skin. Nature 1997; 387:861.
103. Bibel DJ, Aly R, Shah S, et al. Sphingosines: antimicrobial barriers of the skin. Acta Derm Venereol
1993; 73:407–411.
104. Goodarzi H, Trowbridge J, Gallo RL. Innate immunity: a cutaneous perspective. Clin Rev Allergy
Immunol 2007; 33:15–26.
105. Arikawa J, Ishibachi M, Kawashima M, et al. Decreased levels of sphingosine, a natural antimicrobial
agent, may be associated with vulnerability of the stratum corneum from patients with atopic dermatitis
to colonization by Staphylococcus aureus. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 119:433–439.
106. Fore-Pfliger J. The epidermal skin barrier: implications for the wound practitioners, part I. Adv Skin
Wound Care 2004; 17:417–425.
107. Chen X, Niyonsaba F, Ushio H, et al. Synergistic effects of antibacterial agents human b- defensins,
cathelicidin LL-37 and lysozyme against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. J Dermatol 2005;
40:123–132.
108. Braff MH, Bardan A, Nizet V, et al. Cutaneous defense mechanisms by antimicrobial peptides.
J Invest Dermatol 2005; 125:9–13.
109. Sahl HG, Brandis H. Production, purification and chemical properties of an anti-staphylococcal
agent produced by S. epidermidis. J Gen Microbiol 1981; 127:377–384.
110. Matousek JL, Campbell KL. A comparative review of cutaneous pH. Vet Dermatol 2002;
13(6):293–300.
111. Pillsbury DM, Rebell G. The bacterial flora of the skin. J Invest Dermatol 1952; 18:173–186.
112. Lukacs A. Growth of important bacteria of the resident skin flora by changes in pH. In: Braun-Falco O,
Korting HC, eds. Skin Cleansing with Synthetic Detergents: Chemical, Ecological and Clinical Aspects.
Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1990:97–105.
113. Runeman B, Faergermann J, Larko¨ O. Experimental Candida albicans lesions in healthy humans:
dependence on skin pH. Acta Derm Venereol 2000; 80:421–424.
114. Stenzaly-Achtert S, Scho¨lermann A, Schreiber J, et al. Axillary pH and influence of deodorants. Skin
Res Technol 2000; 6:87–91.
115. Korting HC, Kerscher M, Scha¨fer M, et al. Influence of topical erythromycin preparations for acne
vulgaris on skin surface pH. Clin Invest 1993; 71:644–648.
116. Rippke F, Schreiner V, Doering T, et al. Stratum corneum pH in atopic dermatitis: impact on skin
barrier function and colonization with Staphylococcus aureus. Am J Clin Dermatol 2004; 5(4):217–223.
117. Ohnishi Y, Okino N, Ito M, et al. Ceramidase activity in bacterial skin flora as a possible cause of
ceramide deficiency in atopic dermatitis. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 1999; 101:104.
118. Eberlein-Konig B, Schafer T, Huss-Marp J, et al. Skin surface pH, stratum corneum hydration, trans-
epidermal water loss and skin roughness related to atopic eczema and skin dryness in a population
of primary school children. Acta Derm Venereol 2000; 80:188–191.
119. Strange P. Staphylococcal enterotoxin B applied on intact, normal and intact atopic skin induces
dermatitis. Arch Dermatol 1996; 132:28–33.
120. Wickett RR, Trobaugh CM. Personal care products: effect on skin surface pH. Cosmet Toilet 1990; 105:41–46.
121. Murahata RI, Tonton-Quinn R, Finkey MB. Effect of pH on the production of irritation in a chamber
test. J Am Acad Dermatol 1988; 18:62–66.
122. de Almeida e Borges LF, Silva BL, Gontijo Filho PP. Hand washing: changes in the skin flora. Am J
Infect Contr 2007; 35:417–420.
123. Thune P, Nilsen T, Hansatad IK, et al. The water barrier function of the skin in relation to the water
content of stratum corneum, pH and skin lipids. The effect of alkaline soap and syndet on dry skin in
elderly, non-atopic patients. Acta Derm Venereol 1988; 68:277–283.
124. Suetsugu K, Shiraishi H, Izumi A, et al. The effects of skin microbial flora on skin surface conditions.
J Soc Cosmet Chem Jpn 1994; 28:44–56.
125. Kober M. Determination of skin surface pH in healthy subjects: methods and results of clinical
studies. In: Braun-Falco O, Korting HC, eds. Skin Cleansing with Synthetic Detergents. Berlin
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1990:53–61.
126. McGinley KJ, Labows JN, Zechman JM, et al. Analysis of cellular components, biochemical reactions,
and habitat of human cutaneous lipophilic diphtheroids. J Invest Dermatol 1985; 85:374–377.
232
Ansari

=== Page 250 ===
22
Skin Ageprint: The Causative Factors
Ge´rald E. Pie´rard, Claudine Pie´rard-Franchimont, and Pascale Quatresooz
Department of Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
The pace of change in the demography of westernized populations has been rapid over the past
century. In the corresponding affluent societies, an extraordinary shift has taken place in the age
profile of the population, with older people representing a progressively growing segment. The
aging “baby boomers” are now a major demographical force partly driven by the West’s cultural
obsession with the prevention of aging and the desire to maintain a youthful appearance. Thus,
the current demographical evolution has enormous social implications. Indeed, the aging
process is increasingly one of the daring topics of both the media and medical community. Any
new antiaging treatment modality is avidly watched by the population. Middle-aged and even
younger subjects show a craze for cosmetic dermatology when their once youthful bodies exhibit
the early signs of wear and tear. In this field, breakthroughs and novel treatments fulfil some of
the promises. No longer is this search a uniquely female characteristic, men also disdain an
elderly demeanor. In addition to new technological advances, the future prospect of the scientific
approach of skin aging relies on a better understanding of the relationships between skin biology
and physiology and the ultimate clinical appearance.
The aging problem is even more complex and severe in cases where the skin has lost its
protective mechanical function. The atrophy is such that the aspect of “transparent skin” is
reached. Such chronic cutaneous insufficiency/fragility syndrome has been coined “dermatopo-
rosis” (1). The clinical manifestations of dermatoporosis comprise morphological markers of
fragility such as senile purpura, stellate pseudoscars, and skin atrophy. In addition, functional
expression of skin fragility results from minor traumas such as frequent skin laceration, delayed
wound healing, nonhealing atrophic ulcers, and subcutaneous bleeding with the formation of
dissecting hematomas leading to large zones of necrosis. Dissecting hematomas bear significant
morbidity that requires hospitalization and urgent surgical procedures.
FROM GLOBAL TO MOLECULAR AGING AND BACK AGAIN
All living organisms are subjected to aging. However, this event results from a multifaceted
process, which is not the same in all of them. The limitation to any definition of aging lies in the
diversity of life histories of the organisms. Two distinct classifications of life histories are of
major importance. The first classification distinguishes between species that have a clear
distinction between germ cells and somatic tissues from those that do not. The second
classification makes a distinction between the semelparous species, which reproduce only once
in their lifetime, and the iteroparous species, which reproduce repeatedly. The models of aging
are most clearly defined in iteroparous species, which have a distinct soma separate from the
germ line. Aging needs to be considerably qualified when applied to species with other kinds
of life history. It is mistaken, for example, to regard the postreproductive end of life of
semelparous species, which usually occurs in highly determinate fashion, as being comparable
with the more protracted process of senescence in iteroparous species.
Aging of human beings is a physiological process corresponding to a progressive loss in
homeostatic capacity of the body systems, ultimately increasing the vulnerability to
environmental threats and to certain disease status. Nobody can escape from aging. However,
it is evident that the process progresses differently among individuals of the same age. In any
given subject, senescence is heterogenous among organs and also among their constitutive
tissues, cells, and subcellular structures (2). Each and every organ of the human body develops
and fails at its own rate, which is referred to as its age (3). This systematic aging occurs

=== Page 251 ===
throughout the entire body from the time of about 30 to 45 years of age (Table 1). To further
complicate the situation, there is regional variability of skin aging over the body. It is indeed
quite evident that at any time in adult life, the face, scalp, forearms, trunk, and other body sites
show different manifestations of aging. In addition, scrutinizing skin aging at the tissue level
(epidermis, dermis, hypodermis, hair follicle), and further, at the cellular level (keratinocytes,
melanocyte, fibroblast, dermal dendrocyte, etc.) shows a patchwork of aging severity.
Intracellular and extracellular molecules are involved differently by aging. Within each
organ system, aging manifests as a progressive, approximately linear reduction in maximal
function and reserve capacity at the molecular level. Some aspects of aging can be viewed as a
predetermined programmed process. In addition, many of the age-associated physiological
decrements are thought to result in part from environmental insults, either acute or chronic.
However, in some instances, there are relatively few supportive data. To add to difficulties,
physical growth and senescence are both characterized by cumulative progression of
interlocking biological events. They are not always separated because at some time in the
life of the organism they may proceed as if they were in tandem.
Cellular Senescence in Perspective
Granted that death is the ultimate failure of the organisms to withstand the onslaughts of an
inimical environment, what is it in the aging process itself that brings about the termination of
the replicative ability of cells as the individual becomes progressively older? What is it in cells
and organisms that weakens their resistance to the hostile exogenous forces? How is it that
some cells and organisms are programmed to die even without the assault from adverse
environmental threats?
Many in vitro studies have demonstrated that the age of any tissue is strongly reflected in
the behavior of cultured skin-derived cells (4). Replicative senescence of human cells is thus
related to and perhaps caused by the exhaustion of their proliferative potential. According to
the telomere hypothesis, somatic cells lack sufficient amounts of activity of the enzyme
Table 1
Core Age Markers of Each of the Body System
Aging type
Decline in
Average onset age (yr)
Electropause
Electrical activity of brain waves
45
Biopause
Neurotransmitters
Dopamine 30, acetylcholine 40,
GABA 50, serotonin 60
Pineal pause
Melatonin
20
Pituitary pause
Hormone feedback loops
30
Sensory pause
Touch, hearing, vision, taste, and
smell sensitivity
40
Psychopause
Personality health and mood
30
Thyropause
Calcitonin and thyroid hormone levels
50
Parathyropause
Parathyroid hormone
50
Thymopause
Glandular size and immune system
40
Cardiopause/
Vasculopause
Ejection fraction and blood flow
50
Pulmonopause
Lung elasticity and function with increase
in blood pressure
50
Adrenopause
DHEA
55
Nephropause
Erythropoietin level and creatinine clearance
40
Somatopause
Growth hormone
30
Gastropause
Nutrient absorption
40
Pancropause
Blood sugar level
40
Insulopause
Glucose tolerance
40
Andropause
Testosterone in men
45
Menopause
Estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone
in women
40
Osteopause
Bone density
30
Dermopause
Collagen, vitamin D synthesis
35
Onchopause
Nail growth
40
Uropause
Bladder control
45
Genopause
DNA
40
Source: From Ref. 3.
234
Pie´rard et al.

=== Page 252 ===
telomerase to maintain the telomeric repeats in the face of the end replication problem. With
each round of cell division, mortal cells lose some of their telomeric repeats (5). Since telomere
length predicts the replicative capacity of cells, it may provide the best biomarker for cellular
aging.
Stress-induced premature senescence (SIPS) occurs following many different sublethal
stresses such as those induced by H2O2, other reactive oxygen species (ROS), and a variety of
chemicals (6). Cells engaged in replicative senescence share common features with cells
affected by SIPS, including morphology, senescence-associated b-galactosidase activity, cell
cycle regulation, gene expression, and telomere shortening (6). The latter process is attributed
to the accumulation of DNA single-strand breaks induced by oxidative stress. According to the
thermodynamic theory of aging, the exposure of cells to sublethal stresses of various natures
can trigger SIPS, with possible modulations of this process by bioenergetics. Thus, SIPS could
be a mechanism of the in vivo accumulation of senescent-like cells in the skin (7).
Cellular senescence and cancer are closely related by several biological aspects, including
p53 mutation (5,8,9), telomere shortening (10), vitamin A depletion (11), and defects in
intercellular communications (12). The age-related mottled subclinical melanoderma, even at a
subclinical stage, might be a predictive sign for a carcinoma-prone condition (13–15).
Skin Aging: 1, 2, or 7 Mechanisms?
Conceptually, human aging is one single chronological process of physiological decline
progressing with age. This basic process exhibits multiple facets affecting differently the organs,
tissues, and cells. This is particularly true in the skin. Over the past decades, the understanding
of aging skin has considerably expanded, with a welcome emphasis on differentiating the
intrinsic chronological aging changes from photoaging (Table 2) resulting from habitual chronic
sun exposure (16). According to this concept, the changes observed in the skin appearance as a
result of aging reflect two main processes. Firstly, the intrinsic changes in the skin are caused by
the passage of time modulated by hereditary factors, along with modifications occurring
inherently in the structure, physiology, and mechanobiology. Secondly, photodamage is a result
of the cumulative exposure of the skin to ultraviolet (UV) exposure. Clinically, these two types of
aging are manifested differently, with intrinsic aging giving rise to smooth, dry, pale, and finely
wrinkled skin, and photoaging giving rise to coarse, roughened, and deeply wrinkled skin
accompanied by pigmentary changes such as solar lentigines and mottled pigmentation.
Differences between these two types of aging can be seen within one individual when
comparing an area of skin commonly exposed to the sun, for example, the face, the neck, and the
dorsal forearms, with an area commonly masked from the sun, for example, buttock skin.
This concept that is based on a duality in skin aging has been challenged because it may
appear as an oversimplification in clinical practice (17). Thus, another classification of skin
aging in seven distinct types was offered (Table 3). The important variables included the
endocrine and overall metabolic status, the past and present life style, and several
environmental threats, including cumulative UV and infrared exposures, and repeated
Table 2
Comparison of Intrinsic Aging and Photoaging
Feature
Intrinsic aging
Photoaging
Clinical appearance
Smooth texture, unblemished surface,
fine wrinkles, some deepening of skin
surface markings, some loss of
elasticity, redundant skin
Nodular, leathery surface sallow
complexion, yellowish mottled
pigmentation, coarse wrinkles, severe
loss of elasticity
Epidermis
Thin and viable
Marked acanthosis, cellular atypia
Elastic tissue
Increased, but almost normal
Tremendous increase, degenerates into
amorphous mass
Collagen
Bundles thick, disoriented
Marked decrease of bundles and fibers
Glycosaminoglycans
Slightly decreased
Markedly increased
Reticular dermis
Thinner, fibroblasts decreased,
inactive mast cells decreased,
no inflammation
Thickened, elastosis, fibroblasts
increased, hyperactive mast cells
markedly increased, mixed
inflammatory infiltrate
Papillary dermis
No grenz zone
Solar elastosis with grenz zone,
Microvasculature
Moderate loss
Great loss, abnormal and telangiectatic
Skin Ageprint: The Causative Factors
235

=== Page 253 ===
mechanical solicitations by muscles and external forces such as earth gravity. In this
framework, the past history of the subject is emphasized. Accordingly, the global aging is
considered to represent the cumulative or synergistic effects of specific features, each of them
being independent from the others. Such a concept allows to individualize or integrate typical
processes, including, among others, menopausal aging and smoking effects. Increased
awareness of the distinct age-associated physiological changes in the skin may allow for
more effective and specific skin care regimens, preventive measures, and dermatological
treatment strategies in the elderly. As a consequence, the immutability of skin aging can be
challenged (2,18). However, factors of skin aging share some common mechanisms (19). For
instance, molecular mechanisms imply hyaluronate-CD44 pathways in the control and
maintenance of epithelial growth and the viscoelastic properties of the extracellular matrix that
offer new opportunities for preventive intervention (1).
Environmental Aging and Photoaging
Environmental influences produce obvious alterations to the texture and quality of the skin,
the major extrinsic insults being chronic exposure to UV radiation. The action spectrum of
photodamages is not fully characterized. The cumulative effects from repeated exposures to
suberythemal doses of UVB and UVA in human skin are involved in these processes (20). The
role of UVB in elastin promoter activation in photoaging is obvious. UVA significantly
contributes to long-term actinic damage, and the spectral dependence for cumulative damages
does not parallel the erythemal spectrum for acute UV injury in human beings.
Both UVA and UVB initiate a number of cellular responses, including ROS production
within both dermal and epidermal cells. More specifically, cultures of human keratinocytes
derived from donors of different ages and from paired sun-exposed and sun-protected sites of
older donors demonstrate that both chronological aging and photoaging affect gene expression
although in a quite distinct manner. Chronological aging alone, strikingly increases the
baseline expression of the differentiation-associated gene small proline-rich protein (SPR2) and
of the interleukin (IL)-1 receptor antagonist (RA) gene. By contrast, it has relatively little effect
on the UV-inducibility of several other genes, including the proto-oncogenes c-myc and c-fos,
the GADD 153 a gene inducible by growth arrest and DNA damage, and the IL-1a and 1L-b
genes. Photoaging is different because it increases the UV-inducibility of c-fos, but decreases
the baseline expression of the differentiation-associated genes IL-1 RA and SPR2 (21,22). The
physiological impact of photodamages occurs at variable pace on the different skin structures.
For instance, skin loosening and solar elastosis show clinical manifestations independently
from the severity in mottled melanoderma (14).
Photoaging has profound effects on both the epidermis and dermis. The epidermis
becomes atrophic compared to sun-protected areas on the same individual, often with
disordered keratinocyte maturation. Histological features of photoaged skin are most apparent
in the dermis where the extracellular matrix (ECM) shows marked alterations in composition
(23). The collagen network of the dermal ECM is responsible for skin strength and resiliency
and is intimately involved in the expression of photoaging. The major fibrillar collagen
components of the dermis are of the types I and III. In photoaged human skin, precursors of
both proteins are significantly reduced in the papillary dermis, and their reduction correlates
with clinical severity of photoaging (24). This reduction results from a combination of reduced
procollagen biosynthesis and increased enzymatic breakdown by matrix metalloproteinases
Table 3
Cutaneous Aging Types
Aging type
Determinant factor
Genetic
Genetic (premature aging syndromes, phototype related, ethnic background)
Chronologic
Time
Actinic
Ultraviolet and infrared irradiations
Behavioral
Tobacco, alcoholic abuse, drug addiction, facial expressions
Endocrinological
Pregnancy, physiological, and hormonal influences (ovaries, testes, thyroid)
Catabolic
Chronic intercurrent debilitating disease (infections, cancers), nutritional deficiencies
Gravitational
Earth gravity
Source: From Ref. 17.
236
Pie´rard et al.

=== Page 254 ===
(MMPs) (25). Collagen breakdown products within photoaged dermis can negatively influence
procollagen biosynthesis by fibroblasts (26). Fibrillar collagens are closely associated with the
small chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan and decorin. Its distribution closely mirrors that of
type I collagen in the dermis, regardless of level of extrinsic aging (27). Decorin allows
interaction between the fibrillar collagens and the microfibril-forming type VI collagen that
further interacts with type IV collagen, an important component of the basement membrane at
the dermal–epidermis junction. Type VI collagen therefore is likely to play an important
physiological role in the organization of the dermal ECM. Type VI collagen is concentrated in
the papillary dermis and it seems little affected by photoaging (28). Type VII collagen was
reported to be involved in the mechanism of wrinkle formation. This collagen is the major
constituent of anchoring fibrils below the basement membrane providing cohesiveness
between the epidermis and dermis. In photoaged skin, the number of anchoring fibrils along
the basement membrane is significantly reduced, thus increasing the potential for fragility and
blistering in photoaged skin (29).
The elastic fiber network supplies recoil and elasticity to the skin. The process of elastic
fiber formation is under tight developmental control, with tropoelastin deposited on a
preformed framework made of fibrillin-rich microfibrils. Mature elastic fibers are also encased
in fibrillin and form a continuous network throughout the dermis. The elastic fiber network
comprises thick elastin-rich fibers within the reticular dermis, a network of finer fibers with
reduced elastin in the lower papillary dermis, and cascades of discrete fibrillin-rich
microfibrillar bundles, with only discrete elastin, in the upper papillary dermis merging
with the dermo-epidermal junction. Fibrillin is both a product of dermal fibroblasts and
keratinocytes. The elastic fiber network shows considerable disruption in chronically
photoaged skin. Firstly, photoaged skin contains abundant amounts of dystrophic elastotic
material in the reticular dermis (30), which is immunopositive for tropoelastin, fibrillin,
lysozyme, and immunoglobulins (31) Versican, a large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan,
appears to be regulated along with dystrophic elastin, resulting in a relative increase in
photoaging. Although immunohistochemically identifiable fibrillin is present following actinic
damage, the architecture and fibrillin-rich microfibrils are markedly altered. Minimally
photoaged skin shows a similar marked loss of fibrillin-positive structures, implying that
remodeling of the fibrillin-rich microfibrillar network is an early marker of photoaging (32).
All structural changes found in the dermis particularly affect the biomechanical
properties of the skin. A cutaneous extrinsic aging score was derived from the difference
between comparative photoexposed and photoprotected areas (33).
Phototype and Ethnic Aging
People of colored skin comprise the majority of the world population, and Asian subjects
comprise more than half of the total earth population. The most obvious ethnic skin difference
relates to skin color, which is dominated by the presence of melanin (34,35). The
photoprotection derived from this polymer influences the rate of the skin-aging changes
between the different racial groups. However, all racial groups are eventually subjected to the
photoaging process. Generally, Caucasians have an earlier onset and greater skin wrinkling
and sagging signs than other skin types, and in general, increased pigmentary problems are
seen in colored skin, although East Asians, living in Europe and North America, have less
pigment spots. Induction of a hyperpigmentary response is thought to be through signaling by
the protease-activated receptor-2, which together with its activating protease, is increased in
the epidermis of subjects with colored skin (36). Changes in skin biophysical properties with
age demonstrate that the more darkly pigmented subjects retain younger skin properties
compared with the more lightly pigmented groups.
Endocrine Aging
Irrespective of age, most of the skin components are under the physiological control of
endocrine and neuroendocrine factors (Table 4). As such, skin is recognized as a hormone-
dependent organ (37–39). Like any other system in the body, the aging process affecting the
hormonal functions basically results in deteriorations expressed by hormone deficiencies,
which in turn can influence the aging machinery operative in the skin (39). Quite distinct are
the skin manifestations of some endocrinopathies, which may mimick or interfere with skin
aging (37–39). All endocrine glands are affected by the global aging process. A few direct
Skin Ageprint: The Causative Factors
237

=== Page 255 ===
consequences interfere with skin aging. They are mostly related to the declined activity of the
pituitary gland, adrenal glands, ovaries, and testes.
Some hormones and neurotransmitters are synthesized by nerves, as well as by epithelial
and dermal cells in the skin (Table 5). A number of environmental and intrinsic factors regulate
the level of cutaneous neuroendocrine system activity. Solar radiation, temperature, humidity,
as well as diverse chemicals and biological xenobiotics represent important environmental
factors. Some internal mechanisms affecting the neuroendocrine system of the skin may be
generated in reaction to some environmental signals or result from local biological rhythms or
from local or general disease processes (37).
The paradigm of deleterious hormonal effects is presented by the influence of
corticosteroids on skin atrophy. Cushing syndrome and iatrogenic effects of topical and
systemic corticotherapy can equally be involved. Corticosteroids are known to regulate the
expression of genes encoding collagens I,III,IV,V, decorin, elastin, MMPs 1,2,3, tenascin, and
tissue inhibitors of MMPs 1 and 2 (40). However, the exact molecular mechanisms of skin
atrophy induced by corticosteroids are not yet known. The corticosteroid-induced atrophy can
be one of the most severe forms of skin aging corresponding to dermatoporosis (1).
The most important endocrine compound produced by the skin is vitamin D, which is a
regulator of the calcium metabolism and exhibits other systemic effects as well. For example,
Table 4
Neuroendocrine Receptors Active in the Skin
1. Adrenergic receptors
2. Androgen and estrogen receptors
3. Calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor
4. Cholinergic receptors
5. Corticotropin-releasing hormone and urocortin receptors
6. Glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors
7. Glutamate receptors
8. Growth hormone receptor
9. Histamine receptors
10. Melanocortin receptors
11. Miscellaneous neuropeptide receptors
12. Miscellaneous receptors
13. Neurokinin receptors
14. Neutrophin receptors
15. Opioid receptors
16. Parathormone and PTH-related protein receptors
17. PRL and LH-CG receptors
18. Serotonin receptors
19. Thyroid hormone receptors
20. Vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor
21. Vitamin D receptor
Abbreviations: CGRP-R, calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor;
CRH-R, corticotropin-releasing hormone and urocortin receptors;
GH-R, growth hormone receptor; MC-R, melanocortin receptors;
NK-R, neurokinin receptors; NT-R, neutrophin receptors; PTH,
parathormone; PTHrP, PTH-related protein receptors; LH/CG-R,
PRL and LH-CG receptors; VIP-R, vasoactive intestinal peptide
receptor; VDR, vitamin D receptor.
Source: From Ref. 39.
Table 5
Hormones and Neurotransmitters
Produced by the Skin
1. Hypothalamic and pituitary hormones
2. Neuropeptides and neurotrophins
3. Neurotransmitters/neurohormones
4. Other steroid hormones
5. Parathormone-related protein
6. Sex steroid hormones
7. Thyroid hormones
Source: From Ref. 39.
238
Pie´rard et al.

=== Page 256 ===
epidemiological evidence suggests that sunlight deprivation with associated reduction in the
circulating level of vitamin D3 may result in increased incidence of carcinomas of the breast,
colon, and prostate (41). Vitamin D3 and its analogues also modulate the biology of
keratinocytes and melanocytes of the skin in vivo (42).
Growth hormone (GH) is secreted by the pituitary gland under the control of several
hypothalamic and peripheral modulators that exert either positive or negative influences. The
final balance among the modulating factors determines the pulsatile and circadian secretion of
GH. Moreover, physiological changes occurring in particular conditions (i.e., puberty,
pregnancy, aging, and severe acute illness) affect the GH secretion. The peripheral effects of
GH are mainly exerted by insulin-like growth factor (IGF), produced by the liver upon GH
stimulation. The circulating IGF-1 is bioavailable and functionally active depending upon its
binding with the IGF-binding proteins (IGF-BPs).
Skin is a target of the GH-IGF system, which exerts a significant influence on the dermal
and epidermal physiology (43). GH, IGF-1, IGF-2, and IGF-BPs are present in the skin and are
involved in its physiological homeostasis, including the dermo-epidermal cross talking. Thus,
not only systemic but also paracrine and/or autocrine cutaneous activity of the GH-IGF system
contributes to skin homeostasis (43,44). GH supplementation induces skin changes, a part of
which may correspond to some corrective effects on aging skin (45,46).
The progressive decline in dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) serum concentration with
age, and conversely its supplementation have not demonstrated prominent effects on the skin
except on sebum production.
Sex hormones manifest a variety of biological and immunological effects in the skin (47).
Estrogen, alone or together with progesterone, prevents or reverses skin atrophy, dryness, and
wrinkles associated with chronological aging or photoaging. Estrogen and progesterone
stimulate proliferation of keratinocytes while estrogen suppresses apoptosis and thus prevents
epidermal atrophy. Estrogen also enhances collagen synthesis, and estrogen and progesterone
suppress collagenolysis by reducing MMP activity in fibroblasts, thereby maintaining skin
thickness. Estrogen maintains skin moisture by increasing hyaluronic acid levels in the dermis;
progesterone increases sebum excretion.
Both the climacteric period following menopause and the andropause decade may
negatively affect the skin (47–49). Hormone replacement therapy (HRT), during the climacteric
period, helps limitating these changes (50–53). However, there is a limitation because good
and poor responders seem to exist (54). Smoking habit may also interfere with the treatment
result (55).
Catabolic Aging
The elderly often exist on a substandard diet deficiency in many of the nutrients thought to be
essential to maintain health. Protein-containing foods such as meat and fish tend to be too
expensive or troublesome to prepare. Dietary faddism, confusional states, and forgetfulness
are also responsible for an inadequate diet. These situations predispose skin changes that often
amplify the alterations induced by age-related hormone deficiency.
Insufficient fresh fruit and/or vegetables give rise to vitamin C deficiency leading to
scurvy. In this disorder, there is a defect in coagulation resulting in purpura, particularly in a
punctate perifollicular pattern on the legs. In the elderly, iron deficiency is also common and
may result in anemia, generalized pruritus, and some diffuse hair loss.
Essential fatty acid and vitamin A deficiencies because of dietary faddism or deprivation
in the elderly cause xerosis (56). Many of the elderly are also deficient in zinc, and it has been
suggested that this may be an important factor in preventing wound healing. Zinc
supplementation, however, does not improve healing.
Chronic hemodialysis is another example of catabolic aging affecting the mechanical
properties of skin (57,58).
Gravitational Aging
Skin of any part of the body is subjected to intrinsic and extrinsic mechanical forces. Among
them, earth gravitation is important by influencing skin folding during aging. Any force
generated by the skin or applied to it transduces information to cells that may in turn respond
to it (59,60). The effects of mechanobiology may particularly be evidenced in the fibroblasts,
dermal dendrocytes, keratinocytes, and melanocytes (61–63). Physical forces of gravity involve
Skin Ageprint: The Causative Factors
239

=== Page 257 ===
mechanotransduction in the skin (64) and affect cell tensegrity and the cell mechanosensitive
ion channels. As a result, the structure of the dermal extracellular matrix is affected.
The Case of Wrinkles
There is evidence that wrinkles are not related to the genuine microrelief (65,66). In addition,
the microanatomical supports of wrinkles are varied (65–67). They depend on subtle changes
in the structure of the superficial dermis elastotic deposits in the upper reticular dermis,
loosening of the hypodermal connective tissue strands, or, universely, on hypertrophic binding
of the dermis to the underlying facial muscles (66–68). The wrinkle severity rating (69) is
influenced by the nature of the altered connective tissue. Similarly, the skin mechanical
properties are under these influences (70,71).
Photoaged facial skin does not always present clinically with characteristic wrinkling. In
some individuals, usually of light phototype, smooth unwrinkled skin and telangiectasia
predominate. These people appear to be more at risk of developing basal cell carcinomas
(BCC) on sun-exposed facial skin (72,73). Recent work has confirmed that there is an apparent
inverse relationship between the degree of facial wrinkling and the occurrence of facial BCCs.
Mechanistically, little is known regarding how these two clinical outcomes occur in response to
the same environmental stimulus, namely sun exposure, but it appears that facial wrinkling
may, to some extent, preclude the occurrence of BCCs in sun-exposed sites (73).
Smoking is an additional cause of wrinkling (74). Degeneration of elastic fibers by ROS
and the repeated mechanical solicitations by some muscle contractions play a putative role in
the formation of the smoker’s wrinkles.
CONCLUSIONS
Aging is apparent at all levels of the physiology and anatomy of the body. Organs, tissues,
cells, and molecules have their own aging processes that differ in their clinical relevance. The
individual may perceive a global appearance of skin aging. By contrast, prevention and
correction of skin aging may benefit from targeting some of the specific underlying biological
processes.
REFERENCES
1. Kaya G, Saurat JH. Dermatoporosis: a chronic cutaneous insufficiency/fragility syndrome.
Clinicopathological features, mechanisms, prevention, and potential treatments. Dermatology 2007;
215:284–294.
2. Pie´rard GE. Aging across the life span: time to think again. J Cosmet Dermatol 2004; 3:50–53.
3. Braverman ER. Ageprint for antiaging medicine. J Eur Anti Aging Med 2005; 1:7–8.
4. Campisi J. From cells to organisms: can we learn about aging from cells in culture? Exp Gerontol 2001;
36:607–618.
5. Kim SH, Kaminker P, Campisi J. Telomeres, aging and cancer: in search of a happy ending. Oncogene
2002; 21:503–511.
6. Toussaint O, Medrano EE, Von Zglinicki T. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of stress-induced
premature senescence (SIPS) of human diploid fibroblasts and melanocytes. Exp Gerontol 2000;
35:927–945.
7. Hadshiew IM, Eller MS, Gilchrest BA. Skin aging and photoaging: the role of DNA damage and
repair. Am J Contact Dermat 2000; 11:19–25.
8. Itahana K, Dimri G, Campisi J. Regulation of cellular senescence by p53. Eur J Biochem 2001;
268:2784–2791.
9. Campisi J. Between Scylla and Charybdis: p53 links tumor suppression and aging. Mech Aging Dev
2002; 123:567–573.
10. Campisi J, Kim SH, Lim CS, et al. Cellular senescence, cancer, and aging: the telomere connection. Exp
Gerontol 2001; 36:1619–1637.
11. Saurat JH. Skin, sun, and vitamin A: from aging to cancer. J Dermatol 2001; 28:595–598.
12. Krtolica A, Parrinello S, Lockett S, et al. Senescent fibroblasts promote epithelial cell growth and
tumorigenesis: a link between cancer and aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 2001; 98:12072–12077.
13. Petit L, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Saint Le´ger D, et al. Subclinical speckled perifollicular melanosis of
the scalp. Eur J Dermatol 2002; 12:565–568.
240
Pie´rard et al.

=== Page 258 ===
14. Petit L, Fogouang L, Uhoda I, et al. Regional variability in mottled photoinduced melanoderma in the
elderly. Exp Gerontol 2003; 38:327–331.
15. Quatresooz P, Petit L, Uhoda I, et al. Mosaic subclinical melanoderma: an Achilles’ heel for UV-
related epidermal carcinogenesis? Int J Oncol 2004; 25:1763–1767.
16. Trautinger F. Mechanisms of photodamage of the skin and its functional consequences for skin aging.
Clin Exp Dermatol 2001; 26:573–577.
17. Pie´rard GE. The quandary of climacteric skin aging. Dermatology 1996; 193:273–274.
18. De Grey AD, Ames BN, Andersen JK, et al. Time to talk SENS: critiquing the immutability of human
aging. Ann NY Acad Sci 2002; 959:452–462.
19. Giacomoni PU, Rein G. Factors of skin aging share common mechanisms. Biogerontology 2001;
2:219–229.
20. Pie´rard GE. Aging in the sun parlour. Int J Cosmet Sci 1998; 20:251–259.
21. Bender K, Blattner C, Knebel A, et al. UV-induced signal transduction. J Photoderm Photobiol 1997;
37:1–17.
22. Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. Aging versus photoaging: postulated mechanisms and effectors. J Invest
Dermatol Symp Proc 1998; 3:47–51.
23. Ma W, Wlaschek M, Tantcheva-Poor I, et al. Chronological aging and photoaging of the fibroblasts
and the dermal connective tissue. Clin Exp Dermatol 2001; 26:592–599.
24. Talwar HS, Griffiths CEM, Fisher GJ, et al. Reduced type I and type III procollagens in photodamaged
adult human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1995; 105:285–290.
25. Varani J, Perone P, Fligiel SE, et al. Inhibition of type I procollagen production in photodamage:
correlation between presence of high-molecular weight collagen fragments and reduced procollagen
synthesis. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 119:122–129.
26. Varani J, Spearman D, Perone P, et al. Inhibition of type I procollagen synthesis by damaged collagen
in photoaged skin and by collagenase-degraded collagen in vitro. Am J Pathol 2001; 158:931–942.
27. Bernstein EF, Fisher LW, Li K, et al. Differential expression of the versican and decorin genes in
photoaged and sun-protected skin. Lab Invest 1995; 72:662–669.
28. Watson REB, Ball SG, Craven NM, et al. Distribution and expression of type VI collagen in photoaged
skin. Br J Dermatol 2001; 144:751–759.
29. Watson REB, Griffiths CEM. Pathogenic aspects of cutaneous photoaging. J Cosmet Dermatol 2005;
4:230–236.
30. Sellheyer K. Pathogenesis of solar elastosis: synthesis or degradation? J Cutan Pathol 2003; 30:123–127.
31. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Uhoda I, Saint Le´ger D, et al. Androgenic alopecia and stress-induced
premature senescence by cumulative ultraviolet light exposure. Exog Dermatol 2002; 1:203–206.
32. Watson REB, Griffiths CEM, Craven NM, et al. Fibrillin-rich microfibrils are reduced in photoaged
skin: distribution at the dermal–epidermal junction. J Invest Dermatol 1999; 112:782–787.
33. Pie´rard GE, Kort R, Letawe C, et al. Biomechanical assessment of photodamage: derivation of a
cutaneous extrinsic aging score. Skin Res Technol 1995; 1:17–20.
34. Wesley NO, Maibach HI. Racial (ethnic) differences in skin properties: the objective data. Am J Clin
Dermatol 2003; 4:843–860.
35. Rawlings AV. Ethnic skin types: are there differences in skin structure and function? Int J Cosmet Sci
2006; 28:79–93.
36. Seiberg M, Paine C, Sharlow E, et al. The protease-activated receptor 2 regulated pigmentation via
keratinocytes–melanocyte interactions. Exp Cell Res 2000; 254:25–32.
37. Slominski A, Wortsman JN. Neuroendocrinology of the skin. Endocrine Rev 2000; 21:457–487.
38. Kanda N, Watanabe S. Regulatory roles of sex hormones in cutaneous biology and immunology.
J Dermatol Sci 2005; 38:1–7.
39. Quatresooz P, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Kharfi M, et al. Skin in maturity: the endocrine and
neuroendocrine pathways. Int J Cosmet Sci 2007; 29:1–6.
40. Schoepe S, SchI`cke H, May E, et al. Glucocorticoid therapy-induced skin atrophy. Exp Dermatol 2006;
15:406–420.
41. Giovanucci E, Liu Y, Rimm EB, et al. Prospective study of predictors of vitamin D status and cancer
incidence and mortality in men. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006; 98:451–459.
42. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Paquet P, Quatresooz P, et al. Smoothing the mosaic subclinical melanoderma
by calcipotriol. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2007; 21:657–661.
43. Edmondson SR, Thumiger SP, Werther GA, et al. Epidermal homeostasis: the role of the growth
hormone and insulin-like growth factor systems. Endocrinol Rev 2003; 24:737–764.
44. Hyde C, Hollier B, Anderson A, et al. Insulin-like growth factors (IGF) and IGF-binding proteins
bound to vitronectin enhance keratinocytes protein synthesis and migration. J Invest Dermatol 2004;
122:1198–1206.
45. Rudman D, Feller AG, Nagraj HS, et al. Effects of human growth hormone in men over 60 years old.
N Engl J Med 1990; 323:52–54.
Skin Ageprint: The Causative Factors
241

=== Page 259 ===
46. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Henry F, Crielaard JM, et al. Mechanical properties of skin in recombinant
human growth factors abusers among adult body builders. Dermatology 1996; 192:389–392.
47. Pie´rard GE, Letawe C, Dowlati A, et al. Effect of hormone replacement therapy for menopause on the
mechanical properties of skin. J Am Geriatr Soc 1995; 42:662–665.
48. Paquet F, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Fumal I, et al. Sensitive skin at menopause: dew point and
electrometric properties of the stratum corneum. Maturitas 1998; 28:221–227.
49. Raine-Fenning NJ, Brincat M, Musca-Baron Y. Skin aging and menopause: implications for treatment.
Am J Clin Dermatol 2003; 4:371–378.
50. Quatresooz P, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Gaspard U, et al. Skin climacteric aging and hormone
replacement therapy. J Cosmet Dermatol 2006; 5:3–8.
51. Quatresooz P, Pie´rard GE. Downgrading skin climacteric aging by hormone replacement therapy.
Expert Rev Dermatol 2007; 2:373–376.
52. Sator PG, Sator MO, Schmidt JB, et al. A prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study on the influence of a hormone replacement therapy on skin aging in postmenopausal women.
Climacteric 2007; 10:320–334.
53. Verdier-Se´vrain S. Effect of estrogens on skin aging and the potential role of selective estrogen
receptor modulators. Climacteric 2007; 10:289–297.
54. Pie´rard GE, Vanderplaetsen S, Pie´rard-Franchimont C. Comparative effect of hormone replacement
therapy on bone mass density and skin tensile properties. Maturitas 2001; 40:221–227.
55. Castelo-Branco C, Figueras F, Martinez de Osaba MJ, et al. Facial wrinkling in postmenopausal
women, effects of smoking status, and hormone replacement therapy. Maturitas 1998; 29:75–86.
56. Uhoda E, Petit L, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Ultraviolet light-enhanced visualization of cutaneous
signs of carotene and vitamin A dietary deficiency. Acta Clin Belg 2004; 59:97–101.
57. Deleixhe-Mauhin F, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Rorive G, et al. Influence of chronic hemodialysis on the
mechanical properties of skin. Clin Exp Dermatol 1994; 19:130–133.
58. Uhoda I, Petit L, Krzesinski JM, et al. Effect of hemodialysis on acoustic shear wave propagation in the
skin. Dermatology 2004; 209:95–100.
59. Wang N, Butler JP, Ingber DE. Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the
cytoskeleton. Science 1993; 260:1124–1127.
60. Silver FH, Siperko M, Seehra GP. Mechanobiology of force transduction in dermal tissue. Skin Res
Technol 2003; 9:3–23.
61. Ingber DE. Tensegrity: the architectural basis of cellular mechanotransduction. Annu Rev Physiol
1997; 59:575–599.
62. Hermanns-Leˆ T, Uhoda I, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Factor XIII a-positive dermal dendrocytes and
shear wave propagation in human skin. Eur J Clin Invest 2002; 32:847–851.
63. Quatresooz P, Hermanns JF, Paquet P, et al. Mechanobiology and force transduction in scars
developed in darker skin types. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12:279–282.
64. Nizet JL, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. Influence of the body posture and gravitational forces
on shear wave propagation in the skin. Dermatology 2001; 2002:177–180.
65. Pie´rard GE, Uhoda I, Pie´rard-Franchmont C. From skin microrelief to wrinkles: an area ripe for
investigation. J Cosmet Dermatol 2003; 2:21–28.
66. Quatresooz P, Thirion L, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. The riddle of genuine skin microrelief and
wrinkles. Int J Cosmet Sci 2006; 28:389–395.
67. Bosset S, Barre´ P, Chalon A, et al. Skin aging: clinical and histopathologic study of permanent and
reducible wrinkles. Eur J Dermatol 2002; 12:247–252.
68. Pie´rard GE, Lapie`re ChM. The microanatomical basis of facial frown lines. Arch Dermatol 1989;
125:1090–1092.
69. Day DJ, Littler CM, Swift RW, et al. The wrinkle severity rating scale: a validation study. Am J Clin
Dermatol 2004; 5:49–52.
70. Hermanns-Leˆ T, Jonlet F, Scheen A, et al. Age- and body mass index-related changes in cutaneous
shear wave velocity. Exp Gerontol 2001; 36:363–372.
71. Hermanns-Leˆ T, Uhoda I, Smitz S, et al. Skin tensile properties revisited during aging: where now,
where next? J Cosmet Dermatol 2004; 3:35–40.
72. Kricker A, Armstrong BK, English DR. Sun exposure and nonmelanocytic skin cancer. Cancer Causes
Control 1994; 5:367–392.
73. Brooke RCC, Newbold SA, Telfer NR, et al. Discordance between facial wrinkling and the presence of
basal cell carcinoma. Arch Dermatol 2001; 137:751–754.
74. Ernster VL, Grady D, Miike R, et al. Facial wrinkling in men and women by smoking status. Am J
Public Health 1995; 85:78–82.
242
Pie´rard et al.

=== Page 260 ===
23
A Quantitative Approach to Age and
Skin Structure and Function: Protein,
Glycosaminoglycan, Water, and Lipid
Content and Structure
Jeanette M. Waller and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
The anatomic facets of skin are infinite, making a complete review of age-related changes in
skin structure problematic. This overview, therefore, focuses on certain readily quantifiable
aspects of the skin: protein, glycosaminoglycan (GAG), water, and lipid content and structure.
Where possible, we address differences between intrinsic aging, physiologic aging, and
extrinsic aging due to photoexposure, wind, relative humidity, and other environmental
factors, although we acknowledge that this distinction is not always easily made. Ultimately,
we hope to unify each topic and the general understanding of skin structure with respect to
aging. This chapter reviews each category of structure and function in turn, beginning with a
brief description of commonly used quantitative methods of study. Each section includes a
table presenting research data, a discussion of the experimental outcomes and, wherever
possible, an evidence-based summary of the effect of age on the parameter discussed.
TECHNIQUES
One quantitative method of protein study involves measurement of racemized aspartic acid in
skin protein. This racemization represents a major type of nonenzymatic covalent modification
of proteins initially synthesized using only L-amino acids. Aspartic acid racemization (AAR)
leads to an age-dependent accumulation of D-aspartic acid in more long-lived human proteins
(1). The study of AAR in total skin yields data mainly representative of collagen, which
comprises the majority of dermal protein and has 10 to 20 times more aspartate residues per
unit mass than elastin. However, racemization in collagen is slow because of conformational
constraints of the triple helix (1). Racemization occurs more quickly in elastin. Skin samples
can be purified such that, if indicated, the AAR due to elastin alone can be studied and its
longevity measured (1). Elastin in various tissues including the aorta and lungs reveals high
levels of AAR. This indicates a lack of turnover and accumulation of elastin damage in diverse
aging tissues, possibly as part of programmed aging (1).
Raman spectroscopy is a nondestructive analytical method for determining the
structure and conformation of molecular compounds. Although these results are not
quantitative, per se, they are highly informative, as they do not require sample preparation
or pretreatment and thus eliminate much potential interference. Recently, near-infrared
Fourier transform (NIR-FT) Raman spectroscopy has emerged as being specially suited for
the investigations of biologic material (2). NIR-FT Raman spectroscopy exploits an effect
wherein a small amount of monochromatic light scattered by a substance has a frequency
that differs from that of the incoming beam. This frequency difference represents the
vibration frequency of the chemical bonds in the structure being analyzed. Frequency shifts
can be analyzed and presented as spectra, with bands characteristic for chemical bonds in the
examined molecules (2). This method gives highly reproducible results with only minor
differences seen in spectra of different skin types (2).

=== Page 261 ===
PROTEINS
Collagen
Table 1 summarizes data pertaining to skin collagen. Collagen, which comprises approx-
imately 70% to 80% of the dry weight of the dermis, is primarily responsible for the skin’s
tensile strength. Each collagen molecule consists of three polypeptide chains, each containing
about 1000 amino acids in their primary sequence. In the collagen molecule, the a-chains are
wrapped around each other to make a triple-helical conformation (3). In chronologically aged
skin, the rate of collagen synthesis, activity of enzymes that act in the posttranslational
modification, collagen solubility, and thickness of collagen fiber bundles in the skin all
decrease (4,5). Also, the ratio of type III to type I collagen increases with increasing age (4,6). In
photoaged skin, however, collagen fibers are fragmented, thickened, and more soluble (4). The
increased fragmentation of collagen, especially in photoaged skin, is secondary to upregulation
of collagen-degrading matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) by UV radiation (7,8). In addition to
the acute upregulation of these enzymes by UV exposure, the same MMP enzymes are also
gradually increased during chronological aging (9). Aside from increased degradation and
fragmentation, chronologically aged skin exhibits decreased fibroblast function and decreased
mechanical stimulation, resulting in reduced collagen synthesis and replacement (10). It is
plausible that both reduced collagen deposition in elderly skin and enhanced degradation of
collagen in photoaged skin could explain the development of dermal atrophy and might relate
to poor wound healing in the elderly.
Histological data, though not quantitative, reveal important information about orientation
and arrangement of collagen fibers in skin. Lavker et al. compared skin from the upper inner
arm of old (age 70–85) and young (age 19–25) individuals using light, transmission electron, and
scanning electron microscopy (14). Interestingly, they suggested that the upper inner arm might
be an optimal site for analyzing sun-protected skin, as it is not exposed to the pressure
deformations and reformations occurring in the buttock. They found that in young adults,
collagen in the papillary dermis forms a meshwork of randomly oriented thin fibers and small
bundles. The reticular dermis consists of loosely interwoven, large, wavy, randomly oriented
collagen bundles. However, the collagen within each bundle is packed together closely (14). In
aged skin, the density of the collagen network appears to increase. This likely reflects a decrease
in ground substance that would otherwise form spaces between the collagen fibers (14). Also,
rather than appearing in discrete rope-like bundles of tightly packed fibers, collagen forms
aggregates of loosely woven, mostly straight fibers. As fibers become straighter in aged skin,
there is less room for the skin to be stretched, so tensile strength increases (14). Using
immunoelectron microscopy, Vitellaro-Zuccarello et al. found similar age-related trends in skin
collagen. They also noted greater intensity of collagen III staining in subjects older than 70 years
(15). Hence histological and more recent methods are in agreement, revealing that increased age
is associated with decreased collagen content and straightening of collagen fibers forming
looser bundles, an increased type III-type I collagen ratio, and decreased ground substance.
From a biochemical standpoint, chronological aging induces increased markers of
oxidation, glycoxidation, lipoxidation, and glycation in skin collagen (13). In particular, skin
collagen’s cross-linking lysine residues undergo significant oxidative changes with age. Lysine
oxidase, a copper-dependent enzyme, converts lysine to allysine at all ages. Recently it has
been shown that allysine is further oxidized to a stable end product, 2-aminoadipic acid. This
oxidative change results in significant accumulation of 2-aminoadipic acid in collagen of aged
skin; increased oxidative end product is also seen in diabetes, renal failure, and sepsis (13).
Elastin
Table 2 summarizes skin elastin data. The skin’s intact elastic fiber network, which occupies
approximately 2% to 4% of the dermis by volume, provides resilience and suppleness. This
network shows definite changes associated with aging, especially between the ages of 30 and
70. In sun-exposed skin, an excessive accumulation of elastoic material occurs. Accumulation
of new elastin in response to photoaging is also apparent from upregulation of the elastin
promoter activity and increased abundance of elastin mRNA (1,16). Bernstein et al. compared
photoaged skin with intrinsically aged skin, and found a 2.6-fold increase in elastin mRNA, a
(text continued on page 250. )
244
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 262 ===
Table 1
Data: collagen
Source
Methods
Results
Notes
Shuster et al. 1975 (11).
Caucasian males: 74; Caucasian females:
80, aged 15–93 yr: biopsies were taken
from the midpoint of extensor aspect of
forearm using high-speed 5-mm punch.
Some postmortem samples were included.
Samples were defatted in acetone, dried
to constant weight, and hydrolyzed; their
hydroxyproline content was measured.
Linear decrease in absolute collagen
content with age, 1% per yr. Collagen
density decreases with age (p< 0.001).
A significant relationship is noted between
skin thickness and collagen content for all
males (p < 0.001) and for females > 60 yr
(p < 0.001).
Collagen decreases with age. This method
may be subject to preparation artifacts.
Gniadecka et al. 1998. (12).
Study of Caucasians included 10 people
aged 74–87 yr and 10 people aged
22–29 yr. Obtained Raman spectra
from buttock skin and forearm skin, using
NIR-Raman spectroscopy.
Photoaged skin: collagen fibers are
fragmented, thickened, and more soluble,
elastin fibers form conglomerates, and
amount of GAG increases. Chronologically
aged skin: changes are more subtle.
Despite an overall increase in the number
of collagen fibers, these are thinner and
less soluble. Also there is a relative increase
with age in the collagen III:collagen I ratio.
Raman spectroscopy allows a detailed
analysis without preparation artifacts.
The information here agrees with many
of the other studies represented in this
table.
Lovell et al. 1987 (6).
Strips of abdominal skin obtained at
laparotomy or postmortem from
30 subjects aged 0–90 yr.
Some samples were cut and acid hydrolyzed;
hydroxyproline content was determined using
an automated amino acid analyzer and the
total collagen calculated from hydroxyproline
estimations. Collagen content was calculated
both per unit weight of freeze-dried skin and
per unit surface area.
Other skin samples were digested with
CNBr, and type I:type III ratios were
calculated using SDS polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. Pepsin digestion and HPLC
separation of denatured a-chains were also
used to calculate type I:type III ratios.
Indirect immunofluorescence enabled analysis
of frozen skin samples antibody-labeled for
types I, II, IV, and V collagens.
Hydroxyproline content and estimates of total
collagen content did not vary significantly
with age.
SDS gel electrophoresis showed type III
collagen content of skin samples from two
young donors (age 5 yr) was 20–23%.
In people aged 14–65 yr, measurements were
relatively constant; showed content of type III
collagen to be 18–21.5%.
In people older than 65 yr, there was greater
variation; levels of type III were increased
and were as high as 31%.
The HPLC method was less conclusive
because pepsin digestion and separation
of collagen component chains were incomplete,
especially in skin samples from older individuals.
Immunofluorescence data showed no gross
changes in the distribution of various collagen
types during aging.
Electron microscopy measurements
represented a small study population
and are therefore somewhat questionable
(n = 5). Hydroxyproline approximations of
collagen content appear more reliable,
as they include 29 subjects, dispersed
between age 3 mo and 82 yr; however,
this still reflects a small number of
subjects in any given age range.
The shift in collagen type with aging
prompts the question of whether this was
due to increased type III synthesis or
decreased type I synthesis. This study
does not provide an answer.
(Continued )
Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function
245

=== Page 263 ===
Table 1
Data: collagen (Continued )
Source
Methods
Results
Notes
Scanning electron microscopy was used to
study the diameters of bundles of collagen
fibers.
Scanning electron microscopy: decrease in
number of collagen fiber bundles per unit area
in the papillary area with increasing age.
The oldest subject (82 yr) had reduced
bundle width (p < 0.0001) compared with
4 other subjects aged 15–58 yr.
Fisher et al. 1996 (7).
Adult buttock skin (number of subjects not
clarified) was irradiated with 2 MED UVB
in vivo (twice the dose required to cause
barely perceptible reddening). Irradiated
and adjacent nonirradiated sites were
removed at various times following
irradiation and snap frozen. RNA contents
were then analyzed using northern blot.
Band intensities were quantified using a
PhosphorImager. Protein content in skin
was quantified using Western blot. Nuclear
extracts from irradiated and nonirradiated
skin were also temporally analyzed for AP-1
and NF-k B binding to double-stranded DNA
probes by electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
Transcription factors NF-k B and AP-1 showed
2.5–3-fold increased binding to DNA within
15 min of irradiation, lasting up to 4 hr after
irradiation. Induction of interstitial collagenase,
streptomelysin 1, and 92 kDa gelatinase
mRNAs were maximal (6–60-fold, p < 0.05)
at 16–24 hr, and returned to near baseline
within 48–72 hr. Gelatinase mRNA of 72 kDa
was detectable but was only elevated 1.6-fold
at 24 hr post UVB exposure. Confirmation
that mRNA rises corresponded with actual
collagenase protein rises was done using
Western blot.
Within minutes of UVB exposure,
transcription factors AP-1 and NF-k B
showed increased binding to DNA,
stimulating synthesis of various
collagenase mRNAs, which resulted
in increased synthesis of collagenase
proteins. Authors provide direct, in vivo
mechanistic evidence of UVB exposure
resulting in increased collagenases
in skin.
Fisher et al. 1997 (8).
Caucasian adults underwent irradiation of skin
at 4 separate buttock sites, with each site
exposed 1, 2, 3, or 4 times to radiation
delivered at 48-hr intervals at ½ MED.
Skin specimens were obtained from
irradiated and adjacent nonirradiated sites
at 24 hr after the last exposure.
After a single exposure to ultraviolet irradiation,
collagenase and 92-kDa gelatinase activity
were elevated 4.4  0.2 times the value in
nonirradiated skin and 2.3  0.4 times,
respectively. Collagenase and gelatinase
activity remained maximally elevated after
the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th exposures on days 3,
5, and 7, respectively
Repeated UV exposure leads to sustained
induction of the MMPs.
Varani et al. 2000 (9).
Seventy-two subjects provided skin samples
from sun-protected areas; age groups
compared were 18–29 yr, 30–59 yr,
60–79 yr, and 80+. Levels of MMP-1 were
assessed using Western blot, and levels
of MMP-9 and MMP-2 were assessed
using gelatin zymography with scanning
laser densitometry for quantitation. Levels
of type 1 and 3 pro-collagen were
measured using Western blot.
In the 80þ yr group compared with the
18–29 yr group, there was a 40%, 52%,
and 82% increase in MMPs 1, 9, and 2,
respectively, (p < 0.01, 0.05, and 0.001).
In the 60–79 yr group compared with the
18–29 yr group, there was a 23%, 20%,
and 44% increase in MMPs 1, 9, and 2,
respectively, (p < 0.05, NS, and p < 0.05,
respectively). There was a 52% decrease
in type 1 pro-collagen expression in
80+ yr-olds versus 18–29 yr-olds (p ¼ 0.022).
Chronologic aging results in elevated
expression of MMPs and decreased
expression of types 1 and 3 pro-collagen.
246
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 264 ===
Table 1
Data: collagen (Continued )
Source
Methods
Results
Notes
Varani et al. 2006 (10).
Young (18–29 yr) versus old (80+ yr) subjects
participated. Replicate 2- and/or 4-mm
punch biopsies of sun-protected hip skin
were obtained from each individual. For
fluorescence microscopic and ultrastructural
analysis and for the assessment of type 1
pro-collagen levels, 4-mm punches were
used and 2-mm biopsies were used for
routine light microscopy and for isolation
of dermal fibroblasts in culture.
Fibroblasts from young skin produced greater
type 1 pro-collagen than those from old skin
(82  16 versus 56  8 ng/mL, p < 0.05)
A reduction in mechanical stimulation in
chronologically aged skin was inferred from
greater percentage of cell surface attached
to collagen fibers (78  6 versus 56  8%,
p < 0.01) and more extensive cell spreading
(1.0  0.3 versus 0.5  0.3, p < 0.05) in
young versus old skin.
Authors hypothesize that old fibroblasts
have an age-dependent reduction in the
capacity for collagen synthesis while
simultaneously experiencing a loss in
mechanical stimulation resulting from
fewer intact collagen fibers.
Sell et al. 2007 (13).
Human skin samples from 117 people, aged
10–90 yr, were obtained at autopsy.
Amounts of 2-aminoadipic acid and
6-hydroxynorleucine (a marker of allysine)
in the collagen were determined in acid
hydrosylates of processed samples using
ion-monitoring gas chromatography.
Quantitative contents of 2-aminoadipic acid
and 6-hydroxynorleucine were compared in
young and old subjects as well as in those
with histories of diabetes, renal failure,
and sepsis.
2-aminoadipic acid (p < 0.0001), but not
6-hydroxynorleucine (p = 0.14) significantly
increased with age, reaching levels of 1
and 0.3 mmol/mol lysine at late age
(mean 82 yr), respectively. Significant
increases in 2-aminoadipic acid, but not
6-hydroxynorleucine, were also seen in
patients with diabetes (p < 0.0001, levels
of 2-aminoadipic acid up to < 3 mmol/mol),
renal failure (levels of 2-aminoadipic acid up
to 8 mmol/mol), and especially sepsis
(p ¼ 0.0001).
2-aminoadipic acid, a pan-marker for all
forms of lysine oxidation, significantly
increased in aging human skin. Levels
of its precursor, allysine, are in steady
state, suggesting ongoing oxidation of
allysine to form the stable end product,
2-aminoadipic acid.
Abbreviations: CNBr, Cyanogen bromide; SDS, sodium dodecyl sulfate; HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography; MED, Minimal erythemogenic dose; AAR, aspartic acid
racemization; GAGs, glycosaminoglycans; MMPs, matrix metalloproteinases.
Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function
247

=== Page 265 ===
Table 2
Data: Elastin
Robert et al. 1988 (19).
Analyzed 6-mm punch biopsies of skin
from buttock and upper inner arm of
50 individuals (40 males, 10 females).
Used a specific elastic staining procedure,
then automated computerized image
analysis. Calculated percent of surface
area covered by elastic fibers, length,
and number of elastic fibers per unit
surface area in superficial (papillary)
and deep (reticular) dermis as a function
of age.
Percentage surface area coverage by
elastic fibers increased with age in
superficial and deep dermis: Males:
superficial dermis, r ¼ 0.66; p < 0.001.
Deep dermis, r ¼ 0.56, p < 0.01.
Similar correlation in females did not
reach significance because of small
sample size.
Mean fiber length also increased with age
in the superficial and deep dermis:
r ¼ 0.036, p < 0.02.
Number of elastic fibers per unit surface
area showed no significant change with age
in either the superficial or deep dermis.
Continuous increase with age in the length
and relative surface area of elastic fibers.
This appears to contradict these authors’
rheological studies on the same patients
that show a continuous decrease in skin
elasticity with age (19). The authors attribute
this to the possibility of continuous enrichment
with age in polar amino acids, carbohydrates,
lipids, and calcium of the skin elastic fibers.
These structural changes in elastic fibers may
interfere with their proper functioning.
Ritz-Timme et al. 2003 (1).
Skin samples measuring 2  2 cm were
taken from ventral abdomen during
autopsy. Paraffin sections of all samples
were examined histologically. Then,
elastin was purified and AAR was
quantified. Specific ages are not given.
In total skin, specimens displayed slight
age-dependent increases in D-aspartyl
residues; in purified elastin the rate of
increase was rapid and highly correlated
with age (r ¼ 0.98).
This paper goes into great detail, which is
beyond the scope of this overview, but
does provide interesting insight into
elastin degradation.
Ritz-Timme et al. 2002 (21).
Review paper.
Accumulation of new elastin in response to
photoaging can be seen from upregulation
of the elastin promoter activity and
increased abundance of elastin mRNA.
However, de novo synthesis of elastin in
adult tissues is ineffective.
This paper provides a review of AAR and its
role in skin aging.
248
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 266 ===
Table 2
Data: Elastin (Continued )
Bernstein et al. 1994 (16).
Sixteen males aged 49–66 yr. Punch
biopsies measuring 4 mm taken from the
sun-damaged neck and photoprotected
buttock. Studied samples using northern
blot analyses, transient transfections with
a human elastin promoter/reporter gene,
and immunohistochemical staining with
elastin and fibrillin antibodies. Analyzed
samples in pairs to determine effects of
photoaging.
Northern analysis of frozen sections: up to
a 2.6-fold increase in elastin mRNA in
exposed versus nonexposed skin.
Analysis of mRNA from fibroblast cultures:
5.3-fold increase in elastin expression and
2.5-fold increase in fibrillin expression in
photodamaged skin.
Transient transfection of cultured cells
revealed 5-fold increase in elastin
promoter activity.
Score for elastin staining in superficial
dermis, protected skin: 0.62  0.52;
exposed skin: 5.0  0.76. (n ¼ 8,
p < 0.000001).
Score for fibrillin staining in superficial
dermis, protected skin: 0.75  0.46;
photoaged skin: 3.1  0.64 (p < 0.0001).
This study does not include a very broad age
range. Also, since it used several different
methods to establish mechanistic details,
each method had a very small sample size
(3 in Northern blot analysis of total RNA
from frozen sections, 3 in Northern blot
analysis of fibroblast culture, 2 for transient
transfection method, and 8 for
immunohistostaining method).
The increase in elastin promoter activity
and mRNA do not account for the degree
of accumulation of elastoic material seen
histologically in superficial and middermis
of photoaged skin. It is suggested that most
of the material staining as elastin in photoaged
skin is structurally abnormal. Authors propose
that elastin degradation may be slower than
production, with accumulation of partially
degraded elastic fibers.
Seite et al. 2006 (17).
Ninety-one skin biopsies taken from
unexposed (buttock area) skin,
ages 21–80 yr, 30 specimens from
semiexposed (forearm skin), ages
22–64 yr, and 24 specimens from
severe exposure (facial skin),
ages 45–65 yr. UV exposure’s
(280–400 nm) influence on lysozyme
deposition measured using 122 samples
from buttock skin, ages 20–40 yr.
Measurement of elastin and lysozmye
via direct immunofluorescence with
computer-aided quantitation.
Reduced elastin content with age in buttock
skin (groups aged 61–80 yr had
significantly less elastin than groups aged
21–50 yr). Relative amounts of elastin in
the face of subjects aged 51–70 yr were
abnormally high compared with buttock
and forearm skin of those age groups.
UVA (320–400 nm), especially long-wave
UVA (340–400 nm), induces lysozyme
deposition in elastin fibers to a significantly
greater extent than simulated solar
radiation (280–400 nm). 25% of elastin
fibers in buttock skin were covered with
lysozyme, compared to 66% of elastin
fibers in facial skin, supporting the
association of lysozyme with solar
elastosis. Lysozyme was shown to inhibit
degradation of elastin fibers by human
leukocyte esterase.
Authors use an ample sample size and explain
their methodology thoroughly to reveal
mechanistic explanation for solar elastosis
based on increased deposition of lysozyme
in sun-exposed skin; lysozyme inhibits
human leukocyte esterase to prevent proper
degradation of elastin and allow accumulation
of partially degraded fibers.
The lower elastin content in sun-protected,
older skin compared with sun-protected
younger skin implies that human leukocyte
esterase naturally works uninhibited to reduce
elastin content with age; however, the
UV-induced accumulation of lysozyme inhibits
elastin’s degradation with age in sun-exposed
skin.
Abbreviations: AAR, aspartic acid racemization; UV, ultraviolet.
Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function
249

=== Page 267 ===
5.3-fold increase in elastin expression, and a 5-fold increase in elastin promoter activity in
photodamaged skin (16). However, these apparent increases in elastin synthesis do not
account for the massive accumulation of elastoic material seen histologically in photoaged skin
(16). Some attribute this to elastin degradation being slower than synthesis, leading to an
accumulation of partially degraded fibers. Recent work has revealed that proteins such as
elafin and lysozyme, expression of which is induced by UVA radiation, prevent elastin
degradation by human leukocyte (neutrophil) elastase (17,18). In purified skin elastin, the
amount of racemized aspartic acid increases rapidly and is highly correlated with age (r ¼ 98)
(1). This indicates that skin’s elastin, like elastin in the aorta and lung, is long-lived and
accumulates damage over time (19,20).
In innate aging, fragmentation of elastic fibers results in decreased number and diameter.
Computerized image analysis of elastin-stained skin biopsies from the buttock and upper inner
arm reveals an age-related increase in mean elastin fiber length and percentage surface area
coverage in the dermis, but these fibers are thought to be abnormally enriched in polar amino
acids, carbohydrates, lipids, and calcium (19). Through different mechanisms, photoaging and
intrinsic aging ultimately result in a deficiency of functional, structurally intact elastic fibers
(5). The finer oxytalan fibers in the papillary dermis are depleted or lost altogether; eluanic and
elastic fibers become progressively abnormal. These alterations largely account for the widely
recognized decrease in the skin’s physiological elasticity with increased age (19).
Examination of intrinsically aged skin elastin and fibrillin with immunohistochemical
staining revealed that elastin was located in the papillary dermis just below the basement
membrane, as small fibers mostly oriented perpendicular to the epidermis. In the deeper
dermis, fibers were thicker and oriented differently. Areas surrounding adnexal structures and
larger vessels in the deep dermis were also intensely stained (16). Photoaged skin
demonstrated similar small-diameter fibers just below the basement membrane within a
zone lacking excessive staining, which was of variable thickness (16). This may correspond to
the SLEB (subepidermal low echogenic band) seen in ultrasound imaging. Beneath this area of
relatively sparse staining was a region of poorly formed, clumped, thick fibers. This staining
pattern occupied the superficial to middermis, below which staining again resumed its well-
defined pattern as seen in sun-protected skin (16).
Elastin therefore exhibits numerous age-related changes, including slow degradation and
accumulation of damage in existing elastin with intrinsic aging, increased synthesis of
apparently abnormal elastin in photoexposed areas, and abnormal localization of elastin in the
upper dermis of photodamaged skin. These factors lead to the histologically evident elastoic
accumulation and contribute to characteristic changes in ultrasound images of aged skin.
General Protein Structure
Table 3 summarizes data pertaining to other facets of skin protein structure. Through Raman
spectroscopy, little difference is seen between photoexposed and protected areas in young
individuals; the majority of proteins in young skin are in helical conformation. Intrinsically
aged skin shows slightly altered protein structure, and photoaged skin reveals markedly
altered protein conformation, with increased folding and less exposure of aliphatic residues to
water (2,12). Amino acid composition of proteins and free amino acids in aged skin also differ
significantly from those of young skin, including an increase in overall hydrophobicity of
amino acid fractions from the elderly (22). Since free amino acids are believed to play a key role
in stratum corneum (SC) water binding, this shift in their composition, combined with the
evidence of altered tertiary protein structure, provides insight into the increased incidence of
xerosis in aged individuals.
Aside from protein structure, the level of expression as well as the spatial distribution of
certain proteins in the skin appear to change with intrinsic aging and photoaging. For example,
in normal skin, the extracellular matrix protein 1 (ECM1) is mainly expressed in the basal cell
layers of the epidermis and in dermal vessels. The protein’s expression is increased throughout
the epidermis of photoaged skin but significantly reduced in the basal and upper epidermal
layers of intrinsically aged, UV-protected skin (23). Acute exposure to UV radiation also
induces increased expression of the protein throughout the epidermis in healthy young skin
(23). Hence, UV-related stress may also influence distribution and expression of various
proteins involved in maintaining skin structure.
250
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 268 ===
Table 3
Data: Generalized Protein Structure
Source
Method
Results
Notes
Gniadecka et al. 1998 (12).
Study of Caucasians included 10 people
aged 74–87 yr and 10 people aged
22–29 yr. Obtained Raman spectra
from buttock skin and forearm skin,
using NIR-Raman spectroscopy.
Young group: Little difference in spectra
of photoexposed versus photoprotected
sites. Most skin proteins were in a helical
conformation.
Older group: Intrinsically aged (buttock)
skin: Resembled young dorsal forearm
or buttock, except for a significant
(p ¼ 0.008) shift of amide I peak position
toward lower frequencies in older skin,
suggesting minor conformational changes
of protein structure.
Photoaged (dorsal forearm) skin: In addition
to the amide I band, the amide III band was
also significantly shifted to lower frequency
compared with aged photoprotected and
younger skin spectra. Also, decreased
intensity of the amide III band indicated
severe conformational changes in protein
in structure, with an increase in protein
folding and less exposure of aliphatic
amino acids to surrounding water.
In young skin, most proteins are in helical
structure and we do not see much
difference between sun-exposed and
sun-protected regions.
Chronologically aged skin has proteins in
slightly altered conformation.
Photoaged skin has proteins in markedly
altered conformation, with increased folding
and less exposure of aliphatic residues to
water. This enables the proteins in
photoaged skin to bind less water.
Jacobson et al. 1990 (22).
Amino acid composition was quantified in
3 fractions isolated from scales of SC
from the lower leg. The three fractions
studied were free amino acids (FAA),
soluble hydrolysate (SH) and whole-cell
hydrolysate (WCH). “Old” subjects
(n ¼ 20) were 60 yr or older; “young”
subjects (n ¼ 20) were 30 yr or younger.
In normal subjects, each of the 3 fractions
showed significant difference (p < 0.03)
in amino acid composition as a function
of age.
The FAA and SH fractions revealed an
increase in hydrophobic amino acids.
This is an interesting study that goes into
great detail regarding specific amino acid
composition, which is beyond the scope of
this overview. Nonetheless, the general
shift toward increased hydrophobicity is
an important trend that should be noted.
Gniadecka et al. 1998 (2).
Used NIR-FT Raman spectroscopy to
examine 3-mm punch biopsies from
buttock, lower leg, back, and arm in
44 individuals aged 18–35 yr.
Most proteins in the whole skin and SC
were in a-helix conformation. This was
supported by the frequencies of amide I
and III maxima and by a strong C-C
stretch band at 935 cm1.
These data further support that in young
skin, proteins are mostly in a-helical
conformation.
(Continued )
Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function
251

=== Page 269 ===
Table 3
Data: Generalized Protein Structure (Continued )
Source
Method
Results
Notes
Sander et al. 2006 (23).
Evaluated buttock skin and photoexposed
skin of 12 young (<30 yrs) and 12 older
(66–73 yrs) subjects. ECM1 expression was
investigated using immunohistochemistry
with densitometric image analysis for
semiquantitative results. Acute UV exposure
was created by irradiating buttock skin over
10 days with a solar simulator.
In normal human skin, ECM1 is expressed
mainly in basal cell layers of epidermal
keratinocyes and dermal vessels.
Intrinsically aged, UV-protected skin
showed a significantly reduced expression
in basal (~10% decreased staining
intensity) and upper (~8% decreased
staining intensity) epidermal cell layers
compared with young skin (p < 0.05).
In photoaged skin, expression is
significantly increased in the lower
(*15% increased staining) and upper
(*18% increased staining) epidermis
compared with age-matched UV-protected
sites (p < 0.01). Acute photoexposure
also results in marked increased epidermal
ECM1 expression (*8–10%, p < 0.05).
Semiquantitative data reveal acute and
chronic UV-related stress, which appears
to influence expression and distribution
of ECM1. Future studies may reveal
similar impacts of intrinsic and photoaging
on other skin proteins.
Tables 1 to 3 present age-related data on collagen, elastin, and generalized protein structure, respectively. See text for discussion.
Abbreviations: AAR, aspartic acid racemization; FAA, free amino acids; SH, soluble hydrolysate; WCH, whole-cell hydrolysate; ECM, extracellular matrix protein; ECM1, extracellular
matrix protein 1; SC, stratum corneum; UV, ultraviolet.
252
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 270 ===
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS
GAGs are composed of specific repeating disaccharide units. Those attached to a core protein
are referred to as proteoglycans and are found widely distributed throughout the skin. GAGs
most often present in human skin are hyaluronic acid (not attached to a protein core) and the
proteoglycan family of chondroitin sulfates, including dermatan sulfate (24). GAGs are
especially important in skin because they bind up to 1000 times their volume in water.
Therefore, skin hydration is highly related to the content and distribution of dermal GAGs,
especially hyaluronic acid (24).
Table 4 summarizes data regarding GAGs. GAGs increase in photoaged skin compared
with young or intrinsically aged skin (12,24). This seems paradoxical, as photoaged skin
appears leathery and dry, unlike newborn skin, which also contains high levels of GAGs.
Confocal laser scanning microscopy reveals that GAGs in photodamaged skin are abnormally
deposited on elastoic material, rather than diffusely scattered as in young skin (24). This
aberrant localization may interfere with normal water binding by GAGs, despite their
increased number.
A recent study that used laser capture microdissection and quantitative real-time PCR
(polymerase chain reaction) on punch biopsy specimens from human buttock skin found that
decorin, a proteoglycan, may have a significant role in collagen fiber diameter (26). Decorin
mRNA is expressed in the reticular, but not the papillary dermis, and like other GAGs, levels
of decorin are increased with chronological age. It is suggested that a decreased collagen-
decorin ratio may contribute to the changes in ECM structure in aging skin (26).
WATER
In young skin, most of the water is bound to proteins and, appropriately, is called bound water
(2). This is important for the structure and mechanical properties of many proteins and their
mutual interactions. Water molecules not bound to proteins bind to each other, and are called
tetrahedron or bulk water (2).
Data pertaining to water structure and aging are summarized in Table 5. Intrinsic aging
does not appear to alter water structure significantly (12). However, in photoaged skin, Raman
spectroscopy reveals an increase in total water content. Again, this seems paradoxical, as aged
skin is often dry and weathered. However, structurally, significantly more of the water in aged
skin is in tetrahedron form. Thus, as proteins are more hydrophobic and folded, and GAGs are
clumped on elastoic material, they interact less with water, and water in aged skin binds to
itself instead. This lack of interaction between water and surrounding molecules in photoaged
skin likely contributes to its characteristically dry and wrinkled appearance.
LIPIDS
The “brick and mortar” model is often employed to describe the stratum corneum’s protein-
rich corneocytes embedded in a matrix of ceramides, cholesterol, and fatty acids, and smaller
amounts of cholesterol sulfate, glucosylceramides, and phospholipids. These lipids form
multilamellar sheets amid the intercellular spaces of the stratum corneum, and are critical to
the SC’s mechanical and cohesive properties, enabling it to function as an effective water
barrier (28). Changes in SC lipid content have been linked to skin conditions such as xerosis
and possibly atopic dermatitis (28).
Table 6 summarizes data pertaining to skin lipids and age. Many authors agree that
overall lipid content of human skin decreases with age (28–30). Using high performance thin-
layer chromatography (HPTLC), Rogers et al. found a 30% decrease in the face, hand, and leg
of older subjects, but the older group only extended to age 50. No significant change was seen
in proportional composition of lipid classes or ceramide species (28). Schreiner et al. used
small-angle X-ray diffraction to compare lipid composition in subjects aged 23 to 27 years with
subjects aged 63 to 69 years (31). They did not see any overall difference in lipid quantity or
composition between the groups. However, the aged group consisted of only four subjects, and
again, included a narrow age range. Saint-Leger et al. studied the lower legs of 50 subjects and
Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function
253

=== Page 271 ===
Table 4
Data: Glycosaminoglycans
Source
Method
Results
Notes
Bernstein et al. 1996 (24).
Included 6 males, aged 52–60 yr, with
significant photodamage.
Punch biopsies measuring 4 mm were
taken from the sun-damaged posterior
neck and sun-protected buttock.
Histometrically studied GAG content of
papillary dermis using immunoperoxidase
stains specific for hyaluronic acid and
chondroitin sulfate.
Expressed measurements as percent
of fields stained positively for these GAGs.
Studied location of GAGs using confocal
laser scanning microscopy, staining
specifically for GAGs and elastin.
Significant increase in GAG staining in
sun-damaged versus sun-protected
skin from the same individuals:
Hyaluronic acid:
Sun-protected: 13.7  1%
Sun-exposed:
24.4  0.5% (p < 0.05).
Chondroitin sulfate:
Sun-protected:
6.77  0.25%
Sun-damaged:
23.37  0.6% (p < 0.0001).
Superficial dermal GAGs in sun-damaged
skin are clumped and deposited almost
exclusively on the solar elastoic material,
rather than diffusely between the fine
network of collagen and elastic fibers
as in normal (photoprotected) skin,
wherein concentration of dermal GAGs is
greatest just beneath the epidermis and
decreases gradually with increasing depth.
One would expect that increased GAG
content would give skin a youthful
appearance, as it does in newborn skin.
These authors state that the abnormal
location of GAGs in photodamaged skin
may explain the apparently paradoxical
weathered appearance of photodamaged
skin despite increased GAGs.
This study does not consider possible
anatomical variation between neck and
buttock, separate from the factor of
photodamage.
Furthermore, the narrow 52–60-age
range limits the study to one of photoaging
and does not consider intrinsic aging.
Takahashi et al. 1996 (25).
To quantify main disaccharide units of
skin GAGs, high-performance lipid
chromatography was used after labeling
with 1-phenyl-3-methyl-5-pyrazolone.
After comparing 6 “sun-exposed people”
with 6 other “sun-protected people,”
the authors compared sun-exposed and
sun-protected skin within 6 individuals.
Total amount of disaccharide units in
sun-exposed skin was significantly
greater than that in sun-protected skin
(p < 0.05). Also saw a decrease in the
ratio (d)Di-HA (disaccharide-hyaluronic
acid)/dDi-4s (disaccharide-dermatan
sulfate) in photoaged skin.
This article addresses photoaging but not
intrinsic aging. The increase in GAGs in
photodamaged skin agrees with results
of Bernstein et al. (above). The significance
of the increased hyaluronic acid-dermatan
sulfate ratio is unclear.
254
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 272 ===
Table 4
Data: Glycosaminoglycans (Continued )
Source
Method
Results
Notes
Lochner et al. 2007 (26).
Full-thickness punch biopsies isolated
from human buttock skin of 5 young
(21–35 yr) and 5 older (61–68 yr)
subjects. Distribution and expression
of collagens 1 and 3 and decorin mRNA
were measured using laser capture
microdissection and quantitative real-time
PCR in young versus old subjects.
Decorin and collagen expression were
also measured before and after single
exposure with two minimal erythemal
doses of simulated solar irradiation
after 24 hr.
Decorin mRNA is expressed in the reticular
but not in the papillary dermis. Expression
is 105% higher in older than in younger
subjects. Simulated solar exposure resulted
in downregulation of decorin mRNA in both
groups [35% in young; 35% in older).
Collagens I and III expressions were
downregulated with increasing age (29%
and 60% lower levels in collagens I and III
mRNA, respectively, in older subjects
compared with young) and after single UV
irradiation (21% decrease seen with
collagen I and 60% seen with collagen III).
Small sample size, but otherwise convincing
evidence of decreased expression of
decorin and collagens I and III with age
and also with UV radiation. The exact
mechanistic significance is unclear, but
authors concluded that decreasing collagen
to decorin ratio inflected by both age and
UV irradiation may affect collagen bundle
diameter in aging skin.
Table 4 summarizes data on age-related changes in GAG structure and localization. See text for discussion.
Abbreviations: GAGs, glycosaminoglycans; Di-HA, disaccharide-hyaluronic acid; dDi-4s, disaccharide-dermatan sulfate; UV, ultraviolet; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function
255

=== Page 273 ===
Table 5
Data: Water Structure
Source
Method
Results
Notes
Gniadecka et al. 1998 (12).
Study of Caucasians included 10 people
aged 74–87 yr and 10 people
aged 22–29 yr. Obtained Raman spectra
from buttock skin and dorsal forearm skin,
using NIR-Raman spectroscopy.
Younger group:
Most water molecules in young skin were
bound to other macromolecules (the
180 cm-1 band was absent). Saw no
significant difference in water content or
structure in sun-exposed versus
sun-protected skin.
Older group:
Intrinsically aged (buttock) skin: no significant
difference in water content or structure
compared with young skin.
Photoaged (dorsal forearm) skin: increased
content of nonbounded water (180 cm-1
band present). Total hydrogen-bonded water
is significantly decreased in photoaged skin
(p ¼ 0.03). Saw an overall (30%) increase
in water content of photoaged skin.
In young skin, water is primarily present in
bound form. This does not appear to
change with intrinsic aging. However, in
photoaged skin, overall water content
increases and proportionally shifts such
that less of it is in bound form.
Gniadecka et al.1998 (2).
Used NIR-FT Raman spectroscopy to
examine 3-mm punch biopsies from the
buttock, lower leg, back, and arm in
44 people ages 18–35 yr.
Over 90% of water in whole skin is present
in the bound form.
These data support that in young people,
water is mainly present bound to
macromolecules.
Wright et al. 1998 (27).
MRI chemical shift imaging was used to
noninvasively study nine volunteers of
both sexes. Obtained localized (1) H
spectra of the skin, quantified free water
content, normalized to skin thickness.
Relative concentration of free water in the
skin, normalized to skin thickness, was
slightly greater in older subjects and
intanned subjects.
These data are consistent with other studies
showing overall increase in the free,
unbound water content of aged and
sun-exposed skin.
Table 5 presents data pertaining to age and skin water structure. See text for discussion.
256
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 274 ===
Table 6
Data: SC and Skin Surface Lipids
Source
Methods
Results
Notes
Schreiner et al. 2000 (31).
Included 10 normal subjects, aged
25.5  2.5 yr, 10 subjects with dry
skin, aged 30  6 yr, and 4 subjects
aged 66  3 yr. Performed small-angle
X-ray diffraction and lipid analysis on
whole SC samples from the lower legs.
Measured the percent and quantity of
different barrier lipid classes.
No significant difference in the number
of total ceramides, free sterols, and
FFAs between younger and older
groups. While not statistically significant,
there was an apparent increase in
percentage of FFA and compensatory
decrease in percentage of ceramides.
According to this study, lipid compositions
of different skin types do not differ
significantly; however, the aged group
only consists of four subjects.
Rogers et al. 1996 (28).
Included 28 female Caucasians,
aged 21–50 yr. Studied lipid composition
from 8 sequential SC tape strippings of
face, hand, and leg. Corneocytes were
removed from the tape strippings by
sonication in methanol, and lipid extracts
were treated and separated using HPTLC
on 20  10 cm plates. HPTLC plates
were developed, dried, and stained, then
quantitated using a scanning densitometer
at 420 nm. Samples of ceramide fractions
from the leg site were also used to analyze
ceramide 1 esterified fatty acids in relation
to age in the following groups: 26–29 yr
(n ¼ 9), 41–43 yr (n ¼ 9), 57–60 yr (n ¼ 10).
All lipid classes decreased with increasing
age [Overall, saw a 30% decrease in lipid
content in aged subjects. Decrease was
most marked for all ceramide species
(1–6) in the face and hand,
and for cholesterol in the face (p < 0.05)].
Percentage ratios of each of the major
lipid classes and of the individual
ceramide species remained constant.
Esterified FA analysis:
Levels of ceramide 1 linoleate decreased
with increasing age. There were no
significant age-related changes in other
ceramide 1 esterified FAs or in FFA species.
This study included a fairly narrow age
range and does not consider changes
in elderly skin.
Also, the authors only took 8 strippings
from each site; this does not necessarily
include the whole SC.
This study did account for differences
in the amount of SC removed by
measuring protein content in strippings
and normalizing the mass of each lipid
fraction removed.
Saint-Leger et al. 1988 (30).
SC lipids were collected from the right and
left legs of 50 subjects of varying ages.
The SC lipid profile was generally constant
from age 50 yr upward. Aging was
associated with a decrease in sterol
esters and triglycerides. Changes in lipids
did not seem to account for the increasing
xerosis in aged populations.
This is again a very site-specific study. While
the sample size is probably adequate, the
findings in SC taken from individuals’ legs
may or may not be generalizable to other
body surfaces. The question of how or
whether lipid content affects xerosis
may also require further study.
Cua et al. 1995 (32).
Included 7 females aged 24.9  1.1 yr,
7 males aged 28.7  0.5 yr, 7 females
aged 75.3  2.4 yr, and 8 males aged
73.8  1.2 yr. Measured 11 anatomical
regions’ SSL contents.
Skin surface lipid content was not
statistically different between age groups
on all regions except for the ankle, where
lipid content was lower in the elderly
(p < 0.05).
This study accounts for the intraindividual
variation one might expect of the skin
covering different body surfaces and
nicely controls for gender and age.
A similarly designed study with a greater
number of subjects could be very useful
for further confirmation.
Table 6 presents data for age-related changes in lipid content and composition. See text for discussion.
Abbreviations: SSL, skin surface lipid; SC, stratum corneum; FFA, free fatty acids; FAs, fatty acids.
Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function
257

=== Page 275 ===
found that the lipid profile was constant from age 50 upward; overall, aging was associated
with a slight decrease in sterol esters and triglycerides (30). Cua et al. noted significant regional
variation within individuals as they studied 11 sites on 29 people, comparing individuals in
their third decade of life with those in their eighth decade. Interestingly, they, too, found little
relationship between skin surface lipid content and age, except on the ankle, where the elderly
demonstrated decreased lipid content (32). From these contradictory studies, it is difficult to
conclude with certainty whether lipid content decreases with age. Many confounding factors
may hinder such studies, including seasonal and diurnal variation, general interindividual
variation, and the use of several different methodologies by different researchers.
CONCLUSIONS
Collagen becomes less soluble, thinner, and sparser in intrinsically aged skin, but is thickened,
fragmented, and more soluble with photoaging (12). UV exposure leads to activation of
transcription factors that stimulate increased production of collagenases and MMPs, which
lead to breakdown of skin collagen and other proteins (7–9). Also, the ratio of type III to type I
Table 7
Recommendations for Future Studies
Problem
Recommendation
Interindividual variation
A. Larger sample sizes to justify significance. Given the tremendous range of variation
in skin bioengineering parameters, researchers should consider designing studies
using power calculations, wherein before the study, they determine what would be a
clinically relevant difference in measurement between young skin and old skin (d), a
significance level (a, usually 0.05) and power level (1-b, usually 8). For a test
comparing means of measurements, sample size needed for significance at the
specified level is calculated as follows:
n ¼ 2*[z(1a/2) þ z(1b)]2/(d/s)2
Values for z(1a/2) and z(1b) for 5% significance and 80% power, respectively, are
1.96 and 0.8416.
The use of power calculations assumes a normal distribution of the data and equal
numerical allocation of participants to the groups being compared (33).
B. Given the likely significant effects of age-associated hormonal changes on the skin
(34), studies should attempt to normalize for or at least regularly report differences in
hormonal status among groups tested.
Intraindividual variation
A. The average of three measurements should be recorded at any test site; i.e.,
statistics should analyze the mean of three skin thickness measurements on a certain
region of the skin to help minimize “noise” of individual variation.).
B. Standardization of skin sites tested; e.g., we could agree to focus research on a
limited number of specific areas that ideally address issues of lifelong environmental
exposure; we suggest, somewhat arbitrarily:
1) the midvolar forearm, exactly halfway between the centers of the wrist and elbow
joints
2) the middorsal forearm, exactly halfway between the centers of wrist and elbow
joints
3) the mid upper inner arm, exactly halfway between the mid-axilla and elbow joint
3) the exact center of the forehead
4) the upper-mid buttock, 3 cm below the iliac crest and halfway between the midline
and left or right border, so as to minimize effects of lifelong compression and
decompression that occurs on the lower buttock
5) the midline of the back, over spinous process of T2.
Instrument and other
measurement-related
variation
A. Standardization of, or at the very least accurate and consistent reporting of settings
used on bioengineering tools, including frequency settings and gain swept curves on
ultrasonography machines.
B. Since diurnal variation has been demonstrated in skin thickness and echogenicity
studies (4, 35, 36), and may also be a factor in blood flow and water content, studies
should be designed to minimize this variation; all individuals should be tested at the
same or comparable time of day, and timing of the measurements should be reported,
if not standardized.
Table 7 presents several recommendations that may help to decrease variation among future studies.
258
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 276 ===
collagen is reported to increase with age (6,12,15). Histologically, young collagen is randomly
organized into a meshwork of loosely interwoven bundles. Age leads to a loosening within
these bundles and straightening of collagen fibers, increasing skin’s tensile strength (14).
Biochemically, the aging process leads to progressive oxidation of collagen’s lysine residues
resulting in accumulation of 2-aminoadipic acid (13).
Elastin is a long-lived protein in human skin; it appears to accumulate damage with age
and sun exposure. New elastin is synthesized in greater quantities in aged skin, but it is
thought that this synthesis results in abnormally structured elastin (16,21). Also, elastin
degradation does not appear to keep pace with new synthesis in aged skin. This results in
massive accumulation of elastoic material, especially in photoaged skin; degradation is further
impaired by UV-induced expression of proteins elafin and lysozyme (17,18). The abnormal
structure of this excessive elastin prevents it from functioning as it does in young skin.
Studies of primary and tertiary skin protein structure in aged skin reveal an environment
unfriendly to water, with an overall increase in hydrophobic amino acids and greater folding
such that aliphatic residues are more hidden from water (12,22). Also, although total amounts
of GAGs appear to be increased in aged skin, these are abnormally localized on the elastoic
material in the superficial dermis; thus, they are unable to bind water as well as if they were
scattered appropriately throughout the whole dermis (24). Hence it is not surprising that,
although aged skin contains increased amounts of water, most of this water is bound to itself
in tetrahedral form, rather than being bound to proteins and GAGs as it is in young skin
(12). These factors together likely contribute to increased xerosis and withered appearance of
aged skin.
While it tends to be an accepted assumption that lipid content decreases with age,
quantitative studies are contradictory. Some indicate a marked age-related decrease in skin
lipids, at least up to age 50 (28), while others indicate little or no relationship (31,32). Future
studies may be benefited by increased sample size and standardization of method, body site,
and season of study. Table 7 presents suggestions for greater standardization, and hopefully
greater consensus, among future studies.
REFERENCES
1. Ritz-Timme S, Laumier I, Collins MJ. Aspartic acid racemization-evidence for marked longevity of
elastin in human skin. Br J Derm 2003; 149:951–959.
2. Gniadecka M, Nielsen OF, Christensen DH, et al. Structure of water, proteins, and lipids in intact
human skin, hair, and nail. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 110(4):393–398.
3. Oikaren A. Aging of the skin connective tissue: how to measure the biochemical and mechanical
properties of aging dermis. Photodermatol Photoimnunol Photomed 1994; 10:47–52.
4. Gniadecka M, Gniadecki R, Serup J, et al. Ultrasound structure and digital image analysis of the
subepidermal low echogenic band in aged human skin: diurnal changes and interindividual
variability. J Invest Dermatol 1994; 102(3):362–365.
5. Uitto J. Connective tissue biochemistry of the aging dermis. Clin Geriatric Medicine 1989; 5(1):
127–147.
6. Lovell CR, Smolenski KA, Duance VC, et al. Type I and III collagen content and fibre distribution in
normal human skin during aging. Br J Dermatol 1987; 117:419–428.
7. Fisher GJ, Datta SC, Talwar HS, et al. The molecular basis of sun-induced premature skin ageing and
retinoid antagonism. Nature 1996; 379:335–338.
8. Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, et al. Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultraviolet
light. New Eng J Med 1997; 337:1419–1428.
9. Varani J, Warner RL, Gharaee-Kermani M, et al. Vitamin A antagonizes decreased cell growth and
elevated collagen-degrading matrix metalloproteinases and simulates collagen accumulation in
naturally aged human skin. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 114:480–486.
10. Varani J, Dame MK, Rittie L, et al. Decreased collagen production in chronologically aged skin: roles
of age-dependent alteration in fibroblast function and defective mechanical stimulation. Amer J
Pathol 2006; 168(6):1861–1868.
11. Shuster S, Black M, McVitie E. The influence of age and sex on skin thickness, skin collagen, and
density. Br J Dermatol 1975; 93:639.
12. Gniadecka M, Nielsen OF, Wessel S, et al. Water and protein structure in photoaged and chronically
aged skin. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 11:1129–1133.
13. Sell DR, Strauch CM, Shen W, et al. 2-aminoadipic acid is a marker of protein carbonyl oxidation in
the aging human skin: effects of diabetes, renal failure, and sepsis. Biochem J 2007; 404(pt 2):269–277.
Quantitative Approach to Age and Skin Structure and Function
259

=== Page 277 ===
14. Lavker RM, Zheng P, Dong G. Aged skin: a study by light, transmission electron microscopy, and
scanning electron microscopy. J Invest Dermatol 1987; 88:44s–53s.
15. Vitellaro-Zuccarello L, Garbelli R, Rossi VD. Immunocytochemical localization of collagen types I, II,
IV, and fibronectin in the human dermis: modifications with aging. Cell Tissue Res 1992; 268:505–511.
16. Bernstein EF, Chen YQ, Tamai K, et al. Enhanced elastin and fibrillin gene expression in chronically
photodamaged skin. J Invest Dermatol 1994; 103:182–186.
17. Seite S, Zucchi H, Septier D, et al. Elastin changes during chornological and photo-ageing: the
important role of lysozyme. J Eur Acad Deramtol Venereol 2006; 20(8):980–987.
18. Muto J, Kuroda K, Wachi H, et al. Accumulation of elafin in actinic elastosis of sun-damaged skin:
elafin binds to elastin and prevents elastolytic degradation. J Invest Dermatol 2007; 127:1358–1366.
19. Robert C, Lesty C, Robert AM. Ageing of the skin: study of elastic fiber network modifications by
computerized image analysis. Gerontology 1988; 34:91–96.
20. Powell JT, Vine N, Crossman M. On the accumulation of D-aspartate in elastin and other proteins of
the ageing aorta. Atherosclerosis 1992; 97(2–3):201–208.
21. Ritz-Timme S, Collins MJ. Racemization of aspartic acid in human proteins. Age Res Rev 2002; 1:43–59.
22. Jacobson T, Yuksel Y, Geesin JC, et al. Effects of aging and xerosis on the amino acid composition of
human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1990; 95(3):296–300.
23. Sander CS, Sercu S, Ziemer M, et al. Expression of extacellular matrix protein 1 in human skin is
decreased by age and increased upon ultraviolet exposure. Br J Dermatol 2006; 154(2):218–224.
24. Bernstein EF, Underhill CB, Hahn PJ, et al. Chronic sun exposure alters both the content and
distribution of dermal glycosaminoglycans. Br J Dermatol 1996; 135:255–262.
25. Takahashi Y, Ishikawa O, Okada Y, et al. Disaccharide analysis of human skin glycosaminoglycans in
sun-exposed and sun-protected skin of aged people. J Dermatol Sci 1996; 11(2):129–133.
26. Lochner K, Gaemlich A, Sudel KM, et al. Biogerontology 2007; 8(3):269–982.
27. Wright AC, Bohning DE, Pecheny AP, et al. Magnetic resonance chemical shift microimaging of aging
human skin in initial findings. Skin Res Technol 1998; 4(2):55–62.
28. Rogers J, Harding C, Mayo A, et al. Stratum corneum lipids: the effects of ageing and the seasons.
Arch Dermatol Res 1996; 288:765–770.
29. Roskos KV. The effect of skin aging on the percutaneous penetration of chemicals through human
skin. Dissertation. University of California—San Francisco, CA, 1989.
30. Saint-Leger D, Francois AM, Leveque JL, et al. Age-associated changes in the stratum corneum lipids
and their relation to dryness. Dermatologica 1988; 177:159–164.
31. Schreiner V, Gooris G, Pfeiffer S, et al. Barrier characteristics of different human skin types
investigated with x-ray diffraction, lipid analysis, and electron microscopy imaging. J Invest Dermatol
2000; 114(4):654–660.
32. Cua AB, Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Skin surface lipid and skin friction. Relation to age, sex, and
anatomical region. Skin Pharmacol 1995; 8(5):246–251.
33. Woodward, M. Study design. In: Epidemiology: Study Design and Data Analysis. Florida: Chapman &
Hall, 1999;22–27.
34. Shah MG, Maibach HI. Estrogen and skin. An overview. Am J Clin Dermatol 2001; 2(3):143–150.
35. Tsukahara K, Takema Y, Moriwaki S, et al. Dermal fluid translocation is an important determinant of
diurnal variation in human skin thickness. Br J Dermatol 2001; 145(4):590–596.
36. Tsukahara K, Takema Y, Moriwaki S, et al. Diurnal variation affects age-related profile in skin
thickness. J Cosmet Sci 2001; 52(6):391–397.
260
Waller and Maibach

=== Page 278 ===
24
Glycation End Products
Lieve Declercq and Hugo Corstjens
Biological Research Department Europe, Este´e Lauder Companies, Oevel, Belgium
Daniel Maes
Research and Development, Este´e Lauder Companies, Melville, New York, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION: THE GLYCOXIDATIVE AGING PROCESS
Numerous studies have been carried out in an attempt to elucidate the biochemical and
molecular mechanisms of the aging process. The basic biochemical process underlying the
aging process was first introduced in 1956 with the free radical theory of aging (1). This theory
states that oxidative damage to DNA and other cellular components is the main driving force
behind aging. More recent versions of this theory predict that mitochondria are a major source
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that cause oxidative damage. The idea that genetically
damaged mitochondria accumulate with time and are causally responsible for the aging
phenotype via a disturbed energy production and excessive ROS production is at the core of
the so-called mitochondrial theory of aging (2). In 1989, Monnier proposed the Maillard theory
of aging, stating that the fundamental aging process might be mediated by the Maillard
reaction (the nonenzymatic reaction between reducing sugars and proteins, also known as the
glycation process) (3). The free radical-glycation/Maillard reaction theory of aging brings
those two views together. It suggests that free radicals (ROS) and reactive carbonyl species
(RCS) from Maillard reactions may represent interactive elements of a more complex
biochemical pathway. The age-related deterioration then results from the cumulative damage
induced by ROS, by RCS, and by their interactions (4). Glycation of mitochondrial proteins
results in the excessive formation of intracellular superoxide (5). It was recently shown that
senescent human fibroblasts are characterized by a partial uncoupling of the respiratory chain,
resulting in increased proton leakage and enhanced electron transport activity (6). Sto¨ckl et al.
(7) even suggested a cause-effect relationship between impaired mitochondrial coupling and
premature senescence. Others have proposed a key role for high-level ROS-generating
enzymes of the NOX family NADPH oxidases in causing age-related diseases (8,9). Oxidative
damage to DNA has been found to be an important determinant of life span at least in lower
organisms such as Drosophila melanogaster. Studies in higher organisms argue for a role of
oxidative stress in age-related disease, especially cancer; however, the data remain inconclu-
sive on whether oxidative stress determines life span (10). The general consensus appears to be
that the aging process is multifactorial and that it results from an accumulation of damage with
an underlying glycoxidative mechanism. Our interpretation of the glycoxidative model of
aging is presented schematically in Figure 1.
We will now focus on how glycation contributes to the aging process in skin.
FORMATION OF GLYCATION END PRODUCTS
The nonenzymatic protein glycation reaction was originally described by Maillard to explain
the browning reactions taking place during food preparation (11). The initial phase of the
Maillard reaction results in the reversible formation of early glycation products. During this
process, several reactive intermediates are generated, including ROS and/or RCS like
(methyl)glyoxal and glycolaldehyde. The reaction can progress beyond that stage, leading to
the formation of a variety of products collectively termed “advanced glycation end products
(AGEs)”. Heat-generated AGEs that are formed in common foods represent “exogenous”
forms of Maillard reaction products, which are ingested on a daily basis. Cigarette smoke was
found to contain RCS that are able to react with proteins to form AGEs (12). The
“endogenously” formed Maillard products are formed in vivo when reducing sugars or
reactive intermediates react with body proteins. Carbohydrates (sugars) are part of a healthy

=== Page 279 ===
diet. They supply the body with energy, mainly in the form of glucose. When excess (reducing)
sugars are available, they can react with other molecules such as proteins. Both exogenous and
endogenous forms of AGEs are believed to play a role in aging and disease through what has
been generally termed “carbonyl stress” (13).
Some AGEs are characterized by intra- and intermolecular cross-linking with typical
fluorescent properties (14). Their formation can be induced in model proteins by incubation
with reducing sugars (e.g., fructose) or RCS (e.g., methylglyoxal) in vitro. The progressive
formation of AGEs can be followed with fluorimetric detection at wavelengths associated with
AGEs (excitation/emission wavelengths of 370/440 nm). The speed of formation depends on
the nature of the glycating species. As shown in Figure 2, the in vitro formation of fluorescent
AGEs in a model protein (bovine serum albumin, BSA) occurs faster with glycolaldehyde than
with 3-deoxyglucosone or methylglyoxal. The reaction can take up to several weeks when less-
reactive sugars such as glucose or fructose are used to initiate the reaction.
Figure 1
Glycoxidative model of aging. Glycoxidative damage,
induced by ROS and RCS, causes impairment of the oxidative
phosphorylation process in mitochondria. This leads to mitochon-
drial leakage of free radicals and less-efficient ATP production,
resulting in oxidative DNA damage, cellular senescence, and
aging. Abbreviations: ROS, reactive oxygen species; RCS,
reactive carbonyl species. Source: From Refs. 4, 7, 10.
Figure 2
Kinetics of the formation of fluorescent AGEs in the model protein BSA upon incubation with glycation
inducers glycolaldehyde, 3-deoxyglucosone, and methylglyoxal. Fluorimetric detection at wavelengths associated
with AGEs (excitation/emission wavelengths of 370/440 nm). Abbreviations: AGE, advanced glycation end
product; BSA, bovine serum albumin.
262
Declercq et al.

=== Page 280 ===
ACCUMULATION OF GLYCATION END PRODUCTS IN SKIN
Measuring Glycation End Products in Skin
Since the endogenous formation of AGEs is a slow process, the body’s long-lived proteins such
as collagen are mostly susceptible to AGE accumulation. Therefore, the formation and
accumulation of AGEs have been extensively studied in the skin. The presence of glycation end
products in the skin has even been proposed as a marker and predictor for the progression of
certain systemic diseases (15). The initial method for quantifying AGEs was based on the
measurement of collagen-linked fluorescence in tissue biopsies (16). Later, more specialized
techniques were developed to analyze specific AGEs such as Ne-(carboxymethyl)lysine and
pentosidine (17). More recently, the in vivo measurement of skin fluorescence at wavelengths
associated with AGEs (including excitation/emission wavelengths of 370/440 nm) has been
introduced as a noninvasive clinical tool to study age-related phenomena in human skin (18).
Skin autofluorescence has recently been shown to be correlated with the presence of specific
AGEs (19). Skin autofluorescence measurement was then proposed by these authors as an
independent predictor for the development of microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes
mellitus (20). We have been using a similar method to measure in vivo skin autofluorescence at
wavelengths associated with AGEs (including excitation/emission wavelengths of 370/440 nm)
in a healthy population. The data were collected with an LS 50B fluorescence spectrometer
(PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) equipped with a fiber-optic cable (Fig. 3).
Accumulation of Glycation End Products as a Function of Age and Body Weight
In humans, AGEs have been demonstrated to accumulate in the body as a function of age (21)
and in age-related diseases (22). Obesity and overweight are risk factors for various disorders,
including diabetes (23). Even in nondiabetic individuals, glycated hemoglobin values were
shown to increase progressively with age and obesity (24). The increase in overweight and
obesity prevalence is evident in the western societies over the past few decades. More recently,
this trend of weight gain was observed in other countries, e.g., in Asian countries (25,26), and it
is expected to develop worldwide. Although excessive weight gain is a complex, multifactorial
chronic condition involving genetic, physiological, metabolic, and psychological components,
a dramatic increase in energy-rich food intake accompanied by a significant reduction in
physical activity are major contributors to obesity. It is therefore of interest to investigate
whether weight gain and obesity have an impact on the accumulation of AGEs in skin.
Long-term consumption of the reducing sugar fructose was shown to accelerate the
endogenous induction of collagen-linked fluorescence and skin collagen cross-linking in rats
(27). Increasing evidence suggests that reduction of sugar intake by caloric restriction in
various species leads to decreased carbonyl stress and reduced accumulation of AGE
Figure 3
Experimental setup for in vivo measurement of skin autofluorescence at wavelengths associated with
AGEs (excitation/emission wavelengths of 370/440 nm) using an LS 50B fluorescence spectrometer (PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) with a fiber-optic cable. Abbreviation: AGE, advanced glycation end product.
Glycation End Products
263

=== Page 281 ===
products in skin collagen (28,29). In calorie-restricted mice, the rate of glycated collagen and
AGE accumulation in skin were also shown to be slowed down, which was inversely related
to maximal life span (30).
We used in vivo skin fluorescence to evaluate the association between body fat levels (on
the basis of impedance measurement) of healthy but slightly overweight individuals and their
AGE-related skin fluorescence. A panel of 66 female Caucasian nonsmoking healthy
volunteers living in Belgium, aged between 21 and 59 years (median 42 years), was enrolled
in this study. As indicated in Figure 4, the body mass index (BMI, calculated as weight in kg
divided by the square of height in m) of the volunteers was close to normal and ranged from
18.3 to 32.0 (median 24.2). Skin color was measured with a chromameter (Minolta, Osaka,
Japan) and expressed as individual typology angle (ITA8). The ITA-value decreases with
increasing pigmentation of the skin. Multiple linear regression techniques were used to take
into account the impact of skin color on the in vivo AGE-related fluorescence (excitation/
emission wavelengths of 370/440 nm). As shown in Table 1, the fluorescence intensity
attributed to AGEs increased as a function of panelist age ( p ¼ 0.008) and with increasing
percentage of body fat (p ¼ 0.04) (independent of the age effect). These data suggest that within
a population of healthy women with weight from normal to slightly overweight, an increasing
level of fluorescent AGEs accumulates in the skin as a function of age and body weight. In a
separate study, we have found that within a test panel of 448 female Caucasian volunteers
Figure 4
The distribution of BMI for test panel described in the text. The distribution was close to normal with a
median of 24.2. A total of 37 volunteers had a normal BMI, 23 were overweight, and 6 were obese. Abbreviation:
BMI, body mass index.
Table 1
Statistical Outcome of the Multiple Linear Regression Analysis on the Association Between In Vivo Skin
Fluorescence and Percentage Body Fat, Chronological Age, and Skin Color (ITA)
Fluorophore
Fat (%)
Chronological age
Skin color (ITA8)
Partial regression
coefficient
p-value
Partial regression
coefficient
p-value
Partial regression
coefficient
p-value
AGEs (370/440)
0.67
0.04
0.58
0.008
2.48
<106
Statistically significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Abbreviation: AGE, advanced glycation end product.
264
Declercq et al.

=== Page 282 ===
living in the New York area, the independent contribution from body weight and
chronological age on the skin AGE-related autofluorescence was confirmed in the group of
panelists younger than 40 years (n ¼ 147). In the older panelists (n ¼ 301), the effect of age on
the AGE-related fluorescence was much stronger and became dominant over the effect of body
weight (31).
Accumulation of Glycation End Products as a Function of Age and Smoking Behavior
On the basis of a systematic review of 25 prospective cohort studies, it was recently concluded
that active smoking is associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes (32). Literature data
suggest that smoking causes mitochondrial dysfunction via inhibition of complex IV activity
(cytochrome c oxidase) (33). This mitochondrial dysfunction could contribute to increased
endogenous production of ROS (34). Cigarette smoke is also considered to be an inducer of
glycoxidative reactions (12). Nornicotine, a constituent of tobacco and metabolite of nicotine,
can catalyze Maillard-like reactions under aqueous conditions. The plasma of smokers as
compared with nonsmokers contains higher concentrations of nornicotine-modified proteins
(35). A significant rise in the mean levels of the glycation product fructosamine and total
plasma glycated proteins were found in smokers when compared with nonsmoking controls
(36). An increase in dermal collagen cross-linking can be induced in rats by exposure to
cigarette smoke (37). We used in vivo skin fluorescence to evaluate the association between
smoking behavior and AGE-related skin fluorescence in normal healthy individuals.
A panel of 94 female Caucasian healthy volunteers living in Belgium, aged between 18
and 81 years (median 43 years), was enrolled in this study. There were 16 active smokers and
78 nonsmokers. Multiple linear regression techniques were used to take into account the
impact of skin color on the in vivo AGE-related fluorescence (excitation/emission wavelengths
of 370/440 nm). As shown in Table 2, the fluorescence intensity attributed to AGEs increased
as a function of panelist age (p ¼ 0.02) and with smoking (p ¼ 0.03) (independent of the age
effect). These data suggest that within a population of healthy women an increasing level of
fluorescent AGEs accumulates in the skin as a function of age and smoking behavior.
CONSEQUENCES OF GLYCATION END PRODUCT FORMATION AND
ACCUMULATION IN SKIN
Structural Consequences
The glycation process is characterized by the formation of AGEs with intra- and intermolecular
cross-links and with typical fluorescent properties. It is well known that the accumulation of
cross-linked AGEs alters the structural properties of tissue proteins. The cross-linking also
reduces their susceptibility to being removed by catabolic processes, thereby contributing
further to the accumulation (38). The structural changes resulting from a slow accumulation of
AGEs in the skin contribute to the modification of the skin’s biomechanical properties. At the
clinical level, they have been associated with an increase in stiffness or brittleness of the skin
(39,40). This is in agreement with data showing that in vitro glycated skin samples are
characterized by a loss of biomechanical properties (41). The structural changes are not solely
restricted to the dermal compartment of the skin. In a diabetic population, it was shown that
glycation of plantar epidermal proteins could play an important role in the stiffening of plantar
skin (42). The glycation process can therefore play an important role in explaining the changes
in mechanical properties of the skin that occur over several decades of life (43,44).
Table 2
Statistical Outcome of the Multiple Linear Regression Analysis on the Association Between In Vivo Skin
Fluorescence and Smoking Behavior, Chronological Age, and Skin Color (ITA)
Fluorophore
Smoking behavior
Chronological age
Skin color (ITA8)
Partial regression
coefficient
p-value
Partial regression
coefficient
p-value
Partial regression
coefficient
p-value
AGEs (370/440)
9.43
0.03
0.32
0.02
2.22
<106
Statistically significant parameters are indicated in bold.
Abbreviation: AGE, advanced glycation end product.
Glycation End Products
265

=== Page 283 ===
Functional Consequences
The accumulation of AGEs in long-lived proteins and the resulting structural changes occur
rather slowly. The glycation process can have more important short-term consequences as
well. The presence of AGEs can increase cellular oxidative stress and promote inflammatory
reactions (45). The in vivo formation of reactive intermediates such as methylglyoxal can cause
immediate cellular damage by causing the deactivation of enzymes with an important role in
cellular defence or survival (46).
Deactivation of enzymes involved in maintaining energy homeostasis such as creatine
kinase is expected to result in a generalized decline in biological performance (47). Creatine
kinase is responsible for transferring the energetic phosphor group between creatine/creatine
phosphate and adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Clinical studies with 31P nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy have indicated that the capacity to regenerate energy levels after a
mild stress is compromised in older skin (48). As illustrated in Figure 5, creatine kinase is
susceptible to in vitro deactivation upon incubation with methylglyoxal as well as with a
cigarette smoke extract. Methylglyoxal decreases mitochondrial membrane potential and
intracellular ATP levels, suggesting that carbonyl stress-induced loss of mitochondrial
integrity could contribute to the cytotoxicity of the intermediate glycation products (49). As
previously shown in Figure 1, the consequence of mitochondrial damage is a partial
uncoupling of the mitochondrial respiration, mitochondrial leakage of free radicals, and less-
efficient ATP production, resulting in oxidative DNA damage, cellular senescence, and aging
(4,7,10).
Deactivation of protective enzymes such as catalase, superoxide dismutase, glutathione
reductase, and peroxidase will result in a reduced antioxidant defense capacity of the cells. The
importance of the activity of the superoxide dismutase (SOD)/catalase duo has been clearly
established. SOD catalyzes the dismutation of the superoxide anion into oxygen and hydrogen
peroxide. Then catalase will neutralize hydrogen peroxide to oxygen and water. Sun exposure
results in a disturbed catalase to SOD ratio, at least in the upper layers of the skin (50). Low
catalase activity levels have been measured in the skin of patients with vitiligo (51),
polymorphic light eruption (52), and Xeroderma Pigmentosum (53). In vitro studies emphasize
the importance of maintaining the optimal ratio between the different antioxidant enzymes
and its relation to cellular senescence and sensitivity to oxidative stress (54). The observation
that the life span of Caenorhabitis elegans could be extended after supplementation with SOD/
catalase mimics supports the hypothesis that an increased efficiency at which ROS can be
neutralized by antioxidant enzymes may counteract the aging process (55).
Finally, deactivation of enzymes involved in the DNA repair process can have major
consequences for cellular viability and tissue functioning. Defects in cellular DNA repair
Figure 5
A cigarette smoke extract prepared by smoking six research cigarettes from Tobacco Health Research,
University of Kentucky (ref.: 2R4F, 11/2001) into 7 mL of HPLC grade water, containing 7 mL of Triton X100. In
vitro incubation of creatine kinase with cigarette smoke condensate caused a dose-dependent decrease of creatine
kinase enzyme activity. The undiluted cigarette smoke condensate caused 50% loss of enzyme activity, which was
similar to the effect caused by the glycation intermediate methylglyoxal at 4.5 mM.
266
Declercq et al.

=== Page 284 ===
processes have been linked to genome instability. This then potentially leads to an
accumulation of mutations, cellular dysfunction, and aberrant phenotypes at the tissue and
organism levels. Depending on which part of the DNA repair process is affected, the clinical
manifestation of those genetic defects occurs in the form of heritable cancers and/or
premature-aging syndromes (56,57).
TECHNOLOGIES TO CONTROL GLYCATION IN SKIN
Protecting Against Glycation End Product Formation
The overwhelming evidence linking the consequences of the formation of glycation end
products in the skin with aging has strongly stimulated the development of technologies
aimed at slowing down AGE formation. Technologies for either the prevention of AGE
formation in the skin or the reduction of existing AGEs have been proposed by various
laboratories around the world. We intend to limit this review to the description of technologies
aimed at preventing the glycation process and its consequences. In our hands, none of the
ingredients that claimed to reduce the amount of preexisting AGEs (so-called AGE breakers)
have shown to reduce the extent of AGE cross-linking in our in vitro model systems. This does
not exclude the fact that other mechanisms may lead to their removal in a more complex in
vivo system.
To characterize AGE-modified proteins used in studies of formation and structural
effects of glycation, an in vitro assay was developed that surveys the content of cross-linked
proteins with characteristic fluorescent properties. The assay procedure involves the high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation by gel filtration of adducts resulting
from the reaction between a model protein and a glycation inducer at 378C. The quantification
is based on fluorimetric detection at wavelengths associated with AGEs (excitation/emission
wavelengths of 370/440 nm). An example is shown in Figure 6, with creatine kinase as the
model protein before (A) and after (B) incubation with the glycation inducer glycolaldehyde.
The higher molecular weight adducts elute earlier and have the characteristic fluorescent
properties.
This procedure can then be used to evaluate the efficiency of glycation inhibitors in
preventing the formation of AGEs in vitro. Aminoguanidine can be used as a positive control
with well-known anti-glycation activity (58). As shown in Figure 6 (C), this compound
significantly prevented the development of higher molecular weight AGEs in our in vitro
testing model and can be proposed for topical use in products aimed at protecting the skin
from the damages induced by the glycation process.
In any preventative technology, it is essential to control the initial steps of the reaction
process. As described before, the glycation and oxidation reactions are intimately linked at
an early stage of the process. For this reason, it is advisable to evaluate the activity of known
antioxidants such as flavonoids for their ability to control the initial stage of the glycation
process. Experiments conducted in our laboratories demonstrated that more than 75% of the
flavonoid-like materials we tested had an antioxidant activity (based on the luminescent ABEL
R antioxidant test kit for vitamin C type antioxidants) similar to their anti-glycation effect. In
line with published data, the overall outcome suggested that the presence of a hydroxyl
function at the C-3’ and C-4’ position of the B-ring is a requisite for both antioxidant (59) and
anti-glycation activity (60) (see Fig. 7). An additional series of experiments using an ex vivo
skin model confirmed the activity of a blend of eight antioxidants in preventing the damage
caused by UV exposure in glycated skin (unpublished results). Finally, we demonstrated in a
clinical study that the topical application of a product containing a mixture of antioxidants as
well as aminoguanidine and another scavenger of RCS on a group of human volunteers for a
period of two months resulted in a significant reduction of the skin fluorescence intensity at
the wavelengths attributed to AGEs (unpublished results).
These data suggest that the control of the glycation process requires a multifactorial
approach rather than the simple blockage of the Maillard reaction to inhibit the formation of a
covalent bond between a reducing sugar and a protein. The many different steps occurring
during the initial stage of the glycoxidation process, leading to the formation of the early
glycation products, followed by the development of AGEs, cannot be controlled by one single
molecule. On the contrary, a mixture of antioxidants with proven efficacy in protecting cellular
Glycation End Products
267

=== Page 285 ===
Figure 6
The formation of fluores-
cent AGEs in the model protein
creatine kinase upon incubation with
glycolaldehyde. Creatine kinase was
glycated in vitro and subjected to gel
filtration HPLC analysis with fluori-
metric detection at wavelengths asso-
ciated with AGEs (excitation/emission
wavelengths of 370/440 nm). The
enzyme migrates as multiple peaks
in the retention window between 15
and 40 minutes. The chromatogram
of untreated creatine kinase is
depicted in the top panel (A) and
shows no fluorescent signal. Incuba-
tion of creatine kinase with the glyca-
tion inducer glycolaldehyde (panel B)
resulted in the appearance of fluores-
cent peaks with higher molecular
weight that are attributed to the
glycation of creatine kinase. Coincu-
bation with the glycation inhibitor
aminoguanidine partially prevented
the formation of the fluorescent pro-
tein modifications (panel C). Abbre-
viation: AGE, advanced glycation end
product.
Figure 7
Basic structure of flavonoids
268
Declercq et al.

=== Page 286 ===
lipids and proteins as well as the mitochondrial and nuclear DNA together with ingredients
that directly inhibit the glycation process (e.g., aminoguanidine) should be used in the same
preparation to provide the skin with a more complete protection and thereby slow down the
aging process.
Protecting Against Consequences of Glycation
Previously in this chapter, we reviewed the structural consequences of glycation, which result
in the loss of skin resilience and elasticity because of the cross-linking of elastin and collagen in
the dermis. As this cross-linking reaction is nonenzymatic and occurs slowly, it could be
prevented by the regular topical application of products containing the anti-glycation
ingredients we described above. The indirect consequences of the glycation process can have,
in our opinion, far more impact on the skin, as they potentially undermine all the essential
functions of the skin cells. As described above, the early stage of the glycation process involves
the formation of RCS such as methylglyoxal, glyoxal, glycolaldehyde, and 3-deoxyglucosone.
This can increase cellular oxidative stress, promote inflammatory reactions, and deactivate
some of the key enzymes responsible for the protective (e.g., catalase, superoxide dismutase),
reparative, as well as the metabolic function (e.g., creatine kinase) of the cells.
In an in vitro system, it is possible to prevent the loss of enzymatic activity using the
technologies described above. An example is shown in Figure 8, whereby aminoguanidine
prevents the loss of creatine kinase activity induced by incubation with methylglyoxal (47). In a
complex in vivo system, it is advisable to use this in combination with ingredients that will
compensate for the deficient metabolic activity, the lower protective enzyme capacity, and the
reduced DNA repair enzyme activity.
Treatment with a blend with creatine, the reduced form of b-nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NADH), and N-acetyl-L-carnitine helps to replenish the energy reserve pool
while reducing intracellular ROS generation in older skin cells (61).
The UV stable synthetic SOD/catalase mimic manganese complex EUK-134 can be used
topically to compensate for a loss of antioxidant enzyme activity (62,63) and as a result help
restore the protective capacity of the skin against oxidative damage. The indirect consequence
is a 50% reduction of the UV-induced cellular apoptosis (sunburn cells) after treatment with
nanomolar concentrations of EUK 134.
Similarly, the glycation-induced loss of DNA repair activity can be boosted with DNA
repair enzymes, e.g., UV endonuclease from micrococcus luteus and 8-oxoguanine DNA
glycosilase (OGG1). They are encapsulated in a liposomal preparation and marketed by AGI
dermatics under the trade name of liposomal UV endonuclease and liposomal OGG1,
respectively. A significant amount of research has been done (64,65) to prove that the topical
application of a preparation containing a liposomal suspension of these two enzymes is
Figure 8
In vitro incubation of creatine kinase with the glycation inducer methylglyoxal decreased the creatine
kinase enzyme activity by 65%. The loss of enzyme activity could partially be prevented by the glycation inhibitor
aminoguanidine.
Glycation End Products
269

=== Page 287 ===
reducing the amount of DNA damage, and as a result reduces significantly the amount of
cellular apoptosis.
Used together, these technologies provide a broad-spectrum protection from the direct as
well as indirect damages caused by the interaction between sugars and our skin’s proteins.
By interacting at every step of the process described in Figure 1, it is possible to minimize
the impact of the glycation reactions on cellular viability, not only by preventing the Maillard
reaction from occurring but also by restoring the enzymatic activity, which is essential for the
natural protection mechanisms of the cells. Technologies that optimize metabolic activity
restore the protective capacity and boost DNA repair will thereby enhance the cellular
resistance to stress induced by exposure to the environment and slow down the aging process.
CONCLUSIONS
There has been an interesting evolution over the last 10 years in understanding the causes of
the premature skin-aging process. From the very general free radical theory of aging, to the
more specific Maillard theory of aging, the scientific research seems to seek deeper into the real
causes of the premature dysfunction of cellular protection and repair mechanisms. It has been
postulated that the defense mechanism expressed by mammalian cells is the result of an
evolutionary process that has allowed cells to adapt to an oxidative, DNA damaging
environment. Assuming this is true, it becomes difficult to understand why exposure to the
environment can still result in premature skin aging.
Two important factors could explain this condition:
1.
A significant boost in the level of exposure to oxidative stress due to an increase in
environmental pollution and higher levels of UV exposure (more frequent travels
and depletion of the ozone layer).
2.
A malfunctioning of the cellular defense mechanisms caused by deactivation of the
protection and repair mechanisms, leading to the accumulation of deficient lipids,
proteins, and DNA.
The gradual increase in the level of oxidative stress caused by the increased pollution of
the world’s atmosphere is a well-accepted fact that we do not intend to discuss within the
scope of this chapter. The deactivation of the cellular defense mechanism however is of far
more interest, especially in the light of the gradual increase in prevalence of obesity and
cigarette smoke exposure over the past few decades. Both these factors cause AGEs to
accumulate faster in the skin.
In this chapter, we have reviewed how the glycoxidation process has an impact not only
on the structural proteins of the skin such as keratins, collagen, and elastin but more
importantly on the functional enzymes with an essential role in providing the cells with the
capacity to energize, repair, and protect skin cells.
In complete agreement with Monnier (3), we believe that the glycoxidation process plays
a major role in the premature-aging process, as it is involved in three major processes involved
in the accumulation of damage in the cells (Fig. 1).
1.
The glycoxidation process affects the cell’s metabolic function by causing damage to
mitochondrial proteins, resulting in a heightened release of intracellular ROS.
2.
The glycoxidation process causes a deactivation of the essential enzymatic
antioxidant activity, thereby further enhancing the oxidative damage to cellular
components.
3.
The glycoxidation process is linked to the deactivation of the enzymatic DNA repair
mechanism, thereby contributing to the accumulation of DNA damage.
As a result, we see an increase in apoptosis or cellular senescence, possibly even the
development of cells with erroneous genomic structure. The combination of these three factors
can therefore explain why the glycation process contributes to skin aging.
The faster accumulation of AGEs in skin as a function of body weight and smoking
behavior is believed to be accompanied by an enhanced level of damage induced by the
glycoxidation process and a concomitant reduction of the cellular defense mechanisms.
270
Declercq et al.

=== Page 288 ===
The technologies we have described in this chapter can intervene at multiple steps in this
sequence of events. The topical application of products containing a well-balanced mix of
technologies to control glycoxidation and its consequences can help to restore a functional
level of cellular defense. These products should therefore be of great help in maintaining
cellular homeostasis and preventing premature skin aging.
REFERENCES
1. Harman D. Aging: a theory based on free radical and radiation chemistry. J Gerontol 1956; 11(3):298–300.
2. Kowald A. The mitochondrial theory of aging. Biol Signals Recept 2001; 10(3–4):162–75.
3. Monnier VM. Toward a Maillard reaction theory of aging. Prog Clin Biol Res 1989; 304:1–22.
4. Kristal BS, Yu BP. An emerging hypothesis: synergistic induction of aging by free radicals and
Maillard reactions. J Gerontol 1992; 47(4):B107–B114.
5. Rosca MG, Mustata TG, Kinter MT et al. Glycation of mitochondrial proteins from diabetic rat kidney
is associated with excess superoxide formation. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2005; 289(2):F420–F430.
6. Hutter E, Renner K, Pfister G, et al. Senescence-associated changes in respiration and oxidative
phosphorylation in primary human fibroblasts. Biochem J 2004; 380(pt 3):919–928.
7. Sto¨ckl P, Zankl C, Hu¨tter E, et al. Partial uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation induces premature
senescence in human fibroblasts and yeast mother cells. Free Radic Biol Med 2007; 43(6):947–958.
8. Krause KH. Aging: a revisited theory based on free radicals generated by NOX family NADPH
oxidases. Exp Gerontol 2007; 42(4):256–262.
9. Bedard K, Krause KH. The NOX family of ROS-generating NADPH oxidases: physiology and
pathophysiology. Physiol Rev 2007; 87(1):245–313.
10. Muller FL, Lustgarten MS, Jang Y, et al. Trends in oxidative aging theories. Free Radic Biol Med 2007;
43(4):477–503.
11. Maillard LC. Action des acides amine´s sur les sucres: formation des me´lanoı¨dines par voie
me´thodique. Compte-rendu de l’Acade´mie des sciences 1912; 154:66–68.
12. Cerami C, Founds H, Nicholl I, et al. Tobacco smoke is a source of toxic reactive glycation products.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997; 94(25):13915–13920.
13. Monnier VM. Intervention against the Maillard reaction in vivo. Arch Biochem Biophys 2003; 419(1):
1–15.
14. Ulrich P, Cerami A. Protein glycation, diabetes, and aging. Recent Prog Horm Res 2001; 56:1–21.
15. Monnier VM, Sell DR, Genuth S. Glycation products as markers and predictors of the progression of
diabetic complications. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2005; 1043:567–581.
16. Odetti PR, Borgoglio A, Rolandi R. Age-related increase of collagen fluorescence in human
subcutaneous tissue. Metabolism 1992; 41(6):655–658.
17. Dyer DG, Dunn JA, Thorpe SR, et al. Accumulation of Maillard reaction products in skin collagen in
diabetes and aging. J Clin Invest 1993; 91(6):2463–2469.
18. Kollias N, Gillies R, Moran M, et al. Endogenous skin fluorescence includes bands that may serve as
quantitative markers of aging and photoaging. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111(5):776–780.
19. Meerwaldt R, Hartog JW, Graaff R, et al. Skin autofluorescence, a measure of cumulative metabolic
stress and advanced glycation end products, predicts mortality in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc
Nephrol 2005; 16(12):3687–3693.
20. Gerrits EG, Lutgers HL, Kleefstra N, et al. Skin autofluorescence: a tool to identify type 2 diabetic
patients at risk for developing microvascular complications. Diabetes Care 2008; 31(3):517–521.
21. Suji G, Sivakami S. Glucose, glycation and aging. Biogerontol 2004; 5(6):365–373.
22. Monnier VM, Mustata GT, Biemel KL, et al. Cross-linking of the extracellular matrix by the Maillard
reaction in aging and diabetes: an update on “a Puzzle Nearing Resolution”. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2005;
1043:533–544.
23. Betts P, Mulligan J, Ward P, et al. Increasing body weight predicts the earlier onset of insulin-dependant
diabetes in childhood: testing the ‘accelerator hypothesis’ (2). Diabet Med 2005; 22(2):144–151.
24. Boeing H, Weisgerber UM, Jeckel A, et al. Association between glycated hemoglobin and diet and
other lifestyle factors in a nondiabetic population: cross-sectional evaluation of data from the Potsdam
cohort of the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition Study. Am J Clin Nutr
2000; 71(5):1115–11122.
25. Ko TC, Chan J, Chan A, et al. Doubling over ten years of central obesity in Hong Kong Chinese
working men. Chin Med J (Engl) 2007; 120(13):1151–1154.
26. Al-Hazzaa HM. Rising trends in BMI of Saudi adolescents: evidence from three national cross
sectional studies. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 2007; 16(3):462.
27. Levi B, Werman MJ. Long-term fructose consumption accelerates glycation and several age-related
variables in male rats. J Nutr 1998; 128(9):1442–1449.
Glycation End Products
271

=== Page 289 ===
28. Sell DR, Lane MA, Johnson WA, et al. Longevity and the genetic determination of collagen
glycoxidation kinetics in mammalian senescence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996; 93(1):485–490.
29. Cefalu WT, Bell-Farrow AD, Wang ZQ, et al. Caloric restriction decreases age-dependent accumu-
lation of the glycoxidation products, N epsilon-(carboxymethyl)lysine and pentosidine, in rat skin
collagen. Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1995; 50(6):B337–B341.
30. Sell DR, Kleinman NR, Monnier VM. Longitudinal determination of skin collagen glycation and
glycoxidation rates predicts early death in C57BL/6NNIA mice. FASEB J 2000; 14(1):145–156.
31. Corstjens H, Dicanio D, Muizzuddin N, et al. Glycation associated skin autofluorescence and skin
elasticity are related to chronological age and body mass index of healthy subjects. Exper Gerontol
2008; 43(7):663–667.
32. Willi C, Bodenmann P, Ghali WA, et al. Active smoking and the risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2007; 298(22):2654–2664.
33. Alonso JR, Cardellach F, Casademont J, et al. Reversible inhibition of mitochondrial complex IV
activity in PBMC following acute smoking. Eur Respir J 2004; 23(2):214–218.
34. Miro´ O, Alonso JR, Jarreta D, et al. Smoking disturbs mitochondrial respiratory chain function and
enhances lipid peroxidation on human circulating lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis 1999; 20(7):1331–1336.
35. Dickerson TJ, Janda KD. A previously undescribed chemical link between smoking and metabolic
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002; 99(23):15084–15088.
36. Venkatesan A, Hemalatha A, Bobby Z, et al. Nonenzymatic glycation of plasma proteins in smokers.
Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2006; 50(4):403–408.
37. Madhukumar E, Vijayammal PL. Influence of cigarette smoke on cross-linking of dermal collagen.
Indian J Exp Biol 1997; 35(5):483–486.
38. Monnier VM, Kohn RR, Cerami A. Accelerated age-related browning of human collagen in diabetes
mellitus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984; 81(2):583–587.
39. Paul RG, Bailey AJ. Glycation of collagen: the basis of its central role in the late complications of
ageing and diabetes. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 1996; 28(12):1297–1310.
40. Avery NC, Bailey AJ. The effects of the Maillard reaction on the physical properties and cell
interactions of collagen. Pathol Biol (Paris) 2006; 54(7):387–395.
41. Reihsner R, Melling M, Pfeiler W, et al. Alterations of biochemical and two-dimensional
biomechanical properties of human skin in diabetes mellitus as compared to effects of in vitro non-
enzymatic glycation. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) 2000; 15(5):379–386.
42. Hashmi F, Malone-Lee J, Hounsell E. Plantar skin in type II diabetes: an investigation of protein
glycation and biomechanical properties of plantar epidermis. Eur J Dermatol 2006; 16(1):23–32.
43. Smalls LK, Randall Wickett R, Visscher MO. Effect of dermal thickness, tissue composition, and body
site on skin biomechanical properties. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12(1):43–49.
44. Ruvolo EC Jr, Stamatas GN, Kollias N. Skin viscoelasticity displays site- and age-dependent angular
anisotropy. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2007; 20(6):313–321.
45. Vlassara H, Cai W, Crandall J, et al. Inflammatory mediators are induced by dietary glycotoxins, a
major risk factor for diabetic angiopathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002; 99(24):15596–15601.
46. Seidler NW. Carbonyl-induced enzyme inhibition: mechanisms and new perspectives. Curr Enz Inhib
2005; 1(1):21–27.
47. Corstjens H, Declercq L, Hellemans L, et al. Prevention of oxidative damage that contributes to the
loss of bioenergetic capacity in ageing skin. Exp Gerontol 2007; 42(9):924–929.
48. Declercq L, Perin F, Vial F, et al. Age-dependent response of energy metabolism of human skin to
UVA exposure: an in vivo study by 31P nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Skin Res Technol
2002; 8(2):125–132.
49. de Arriba SG, Stuchbury G, Yarin J, et al. Methylglyoxal impairs glucose metabolism and leads
to energy depletion in neuronal cells–protection by carbonyl scavengers. Neurobiol Aging 2007;
28(7):1044–1050.
50. Hellemans L, Corstjens H, Neven A, et al. Antioxidant enzyme activity in human stratum corneum
shows seasonal variation with an age-dependent recovery. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(3):434–439.
51. Schallreuter KU, Moore J, Wood JM, et al. In vivo and in vitro evidence for hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
accumulation in the epidermis of patients with vitiligo and its successful removal by a UVB-activated
pseudocatalase. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 1999; 4:91–96.
52. Guarrera M, Ferrari P, Rebora A. Catalase in the stratum corneum of patients with polymorphic light
eruption. Acta Derm Venereol 1998; 78:1–2.
53. Hoffschir F, Daya-Grosjean L, Petit PX, et al. Low catalase activity in xeroderma pigmentosum
fibroblasts and SV40-transformed human cell lines is directly related to decreased intracellular levels
of the cofactor, NADPH. Free Radic Biol Med 1998; 24:809–816.
54. de Haan JB, Cristiano F, Iannello R, et al. Elevation in the ratio of Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase to
glutathione peroxidase activity induces features of cellular senescence and this effect is mediated by
hydrogen peroxide. Hum Mol Genet 1996; 5(2):283–292.
272
Declercq et al.

=== Page 290 ===
55. Melov S, Ravenscroft J, Malik S, et al. Extension of life span with superoxide dismutase/catalase
mimics. Science 2000; 289:1567–1569.
56. Andressoo JO, Hoeijmakers JH, Mitchell JR. Nucleotide excision repair disorders and the balance
between cancer and aging. Cell Cycle 2006; 5(24):2886–2888.
57. Burhans WC, Weinberger M. DNA replication stress, genome instability and aging. Nucleic Acids Res
2007; 35(22):7545–7556.
58. Brownlee M, Vlassara H, Kooney A, et al. Aminoguanidine prevents diabetes-induced arterial wall
protein cross-linking. Science 1986; 232(4758):1629–1632.
59. Cos P, Ying L, Calomme M, et al. Structure-activity relationship and classification of flavonoids as
inhibitors of xanthine oxidase and superoxide scavengers. J Nat Prod 1998; 61(1):71–76.
60. Cervantes-Laurean D, Schramm DD, Jacobson EL, et al. Inhibition of advanced glycation end product
formation on collagen by rutin and its metabolites. J Nutr Biochem 2006; 17(8):531–540.
61. Declercq L, Collins D, Foyouzi-Youssefi R, et al. Cosmetic benefits from modulation of cellular energy
metabolism in aging skin. In: Wille JJ, ed. Skin Delivery Systems: Transdermals, Dermatologicals and
Cosmetic Actives. : Blackwell Publishing, 2006:117–125.
62. Maes D, Collins D, Corstjens H, et al. The ins and outs of skin protection techniques. J Cosmet Sci
2004; 55(1):134–135.
63. Declercq L, Sente I, Hellemans L, et al. Use of the synthetic superoxide dismutase/catalase mimetic
EUK-134 to compensate for seasonal antioxidant deficiency by reducing pre-existing lipid peroxides
at the human skin surface. Int J Cosmet Sci 2004; 26:255–263.
64. Yarosh DB, Kibitel J, O’Connor A, et al. DNA repair liposomes in antimutagenesis. J Env Path Toxicol
Oncol 1997; 16(4):287–292.
65. Yarosh DB, Canning MT, Teicher D, et al. After sun reversal of DNA damage: enhancing skin repair.
Mutat Res 2005; 571(1–2):57–64.
Glycation End Products
273

=== Page 292 ===
25
Spectrophotometric Intracutaneous
Analysis (SIAscopy)
Paul J. Matts
Procter & Gamble, Egham, U.K.
Symon D. Cotton
Astron Clinica, Cambridge, U.K.
WHAT IS SIASCOPY?
Spectrophotometric intracutaneous analysis (SIA)scopy is a skin-imaging technique that
allows the rapid, noninvasive in vivo quantification and assessment of (eu) melanin, (oxy)
hemoglobin, and dermal collagen within human skin. A powerful feature of SIAscopy is that
it produces independent linear measurements of each of these endpoints, which can also
be mapped over the skin, producing images called SIAscans. SIAscopy was originally
developed for the assessment of malignant melanoma (1) where the accurate assessment of
melanin, blood, and collagen has been shown to increase diagnostic accuracy (2) for the
disease.
SIAscopy measures underlying histological parameters through the use of a model of
tissue coloration, providing a cross-reference between spectral measurements and histology.
The model is constructed by computing the spectral composition of light remitted from the
skin, given parameters specifying its structure and optical properties, providing a unique
mapping between the spectral measurements and the histological parameters (3). For each
histological component, a parametric image is then created, providing the magnitude of each
at all pixel locations. This approach requires two inputs: the first is a set of parameters that
characterize a given tissue by specifying its components, their optical properties, their
quantities, and their geometry; the second is a method for computing the remitted spectra from
the given parameters.
CONSTRUCTION OF THE MATHEMATICAL OPTICAL MODEL OF HUMAN SKIN
The skin consists of a number of layers with distinct functions and optical properties as shown
in Figure 1. Light incident to the skin penetrates the superficial layers, and while some of it is
absorbed, much is remitted back and can be measured.
The stratum corneum is a protective layer consisting of keratinized squamous cells
(corneocytes), and it varies in thickness across the body. Apart from forward scattering of
incident light, it is optically neutral (4). The epidermis is composed of several layers of
differentiating keratinocytes and also contains pigment-producing cells, melanocytes, and
their product, the melanins. The melanins are complex heteropolymers that strongly absorb
short-wavelength radiation, i.e., light in the blue part of the visible spectrum and radiation in
the ultraviolet (UV) waveband (in the latter case, therefore, acting as a filter to protect the
deeper layers of the skin from the well-documented harmful effects of UV radiation). Within
the epidermal layer, there is very little scattering and that which does occur is forward
directed. This means that all light not absorbed by melanin can be considered to pass into the
dermis. The dermis is composed largely of collagen fibers, and in contrast to the epidermis, it
contains sensors, receptors, blood vessels, and nerve endings. Hemoglobin, present in blood
vessels within the dermis, acts as a selective absorber of light. The dermis consists of two
structurally different layers, papillary and reticular, which differ principally in the size of
collagen fibers. The scale of the collagen fibers in the papillary dermis (diameter of an order
of magnitude less than the incident visible light) makes this layer highly scattering, i.e., any
incoming light is scattered with a proportion directed back toward the skin surface. The
scatter is greatest at the blue end of the spectrum, decreasing with increasing wavelength

=== Page 293 ===
(through green and red and into the infrared). Within the reticular dermis, in contrast, the
larger scale of collagen fiber bundles causes highly forward-directed scattering (1). Thus, any
light reaching this layer passes deeper into the skin and does not contribute to the remitted
spectrum.
From these first principles, therefore, the mathematical optical model for normal skin has
three layers corresponding to epidermis, upper papillary dermis (with prevalence of blood),
and lower papillary dermis. The range of wavelengths used by the SIAscope technique, from
400 to 1000 nm, covers the entire visible spectrum and a small range of near infrared. Recently,
the model has been verified by comparing its output to that generated by a stochastic Monte
Carlo method using a public domain implementation (Figs. 2 and 3) (5).
Figure 2
Absorption coefficients of principal components of human skin.
Figure 1
A schematic representation of skin layers (labels on the left) and chromophores (labels on the right ).
276
Matts and Cotton

=== Page 294 ===
CONTACT SIASCOPY
Contact SIAscopy uses a small handheld scanner (Fig. 4), which is placed in contact with the
skin. This contact ensures that the distance of the skin from the lens is known and fixed, which
allows exact calibration of the spectral imaging used. This control of imaging geometry allows
the synthesis of accurate gray scale concentration maps each of (oxy) hemoglobin, (eu) melanin,
collagen, and the position of melanin relative to the dermo-epidermal junction (Fig. 5). A small
Figure 4
SIAscope.
Figure 3
Schematic relationship between two
reference systems: color system, with axes
R, G, and B; and the histological components
hemoglobin, melanin, and collagen.
Figure 5
SIAscans showing, from left: color, collagen, melanin, and hemoglobin.
Spectrophotometric Intracutaneous Analysis
277

=== Page 295 ===
amount of matching fluid is used to ensure that optical aberration due to the refractive index of
air is removed effectively.
The contact SIAscope provides a rapid and convenient method for assessing and
characterizing intrinsic and extrinsic skin aging and also assessing the effects of cosmetic
products, for example, the reduction of solar lentigines (6,7).
CHROMOPHORE MAPPING
We have given the term “chromophore mapping” to the synthesis and subsequent analysis of
the gray scale molecular concentration maps produced by SIAscopy. These maps are readily
accessible by a wide range of image analysis techniques, allowing sophisticated analysis of the
arrangements of chromophores within them. We used these techniques in a study performed
on 400 female Caucasian subjects aged 10 to 70 years, recruited in equal five-year cohorts (7),
and demonstrated remarkable relationships for the melanin, hemoglobin, and collagen
endpoints (obtained using a contact SIAscope) with age, consistent with ingoing hypotheses
relating to the extent and timetabling of expression for each of these optical skin components.
Moreover, sufficient dynamic range was present within the data to allow the use of this
technique to track changes in these chromophores because of treatment.
SURFACE ANALYSIS
Further development of the contact SIAscope method has yielded an analysis of fine surface
topograhical features (“microtexture” and fine lines and wrinkles) (8). This technique uses the
fact that light returning from the skin is a blend of deeply scattered light and direct surface
reflection resulting from the stacked nature of the stratum corneum. If the deeply scattered
light is isolated and removed, the remaining directly reflected light carries information
pertaining to the skin surface. Other workers have used this phenomenon by acquiring
separate images taken in different polarization states (9). This is a useful technique, but
requires specialist hardware and can suffer from registration problems between image sets.
Highly detailed information regarding the surface of the skin can be obtained using
contact SIAscopy because the instrument polarizers operate only within the visible region of
the spectrum and do not interact with infrared light (Fig. 6). This results in suppression of
surface reflection in the visible spectrum only (which is why a matching fluid is required to
obtain accurate collagen measurements). By using a technique described in (8), a prediction of
Figure 6
Skin surface micro architecture mea-
sured with a SIAscope.
278
Matts and Cotton

=== Page 296 ===
what the polarized infrared signal should be is made from the polarized-visible spectra and
then compared with the actual unpolarized infrared measurement. The difference is then
converted into a measurement of direct surface scatter. The result is a detailed map of skin
topology, which is both rapid and simple, lending itself naturally to large scale cosmetic testing
and development.
HYDRATION
An adaptation of the surface analysis technique can also be used to assess skin hydration levels
in vivo, allowing investigation into the effects of skin moisturizers and also diseased skin
conditions such as eczema. This technique operates on the principle that direct surface
reflection measured by the surface analysis technique is lower in hydrated stratum corneum.
An example of skin moisturization changing over time following the application of a topical
moisturizer is shown in Figure 7, with the false color images showing the spatial changes in
hydration over a 10-minute period.
NONCONTACT SIASCOPY
Noncontact SIAscopy (NCS) uses a digital camera as a broad-band spectrometer to recover
chromophore information over a wide area. The same mathematical model underpinning
contact SIAscopy is used to create a mathematical model of the camera response to varying
amounts of hemoglobin and melanin (10). The mathematical model is based on the Bayer filter
response curves, the light-sensitive array that sits at the focal point of a digital camera, and
the spectral power distribution of the light source (usually a flash) used with the camera. To
measure the response curves of the Bayer filter, a double-monochromator is used to illuminate
it with specific and highly calibrated narrow (<10 nm) wavebands of light.
A problem still exists, however, because the geometry of the scene being imaged is not
known and, therefore, calibration of the measured information is difficult. To overcome this
problem, a ratio of different Bayer filter wavebands forms the input to the mathematical
model. The use of ratios removes the artifacts of geometry, as they are present equally in all
wavebands. From first principles, this approach reduces the number of chromophores that
can be measured, such that NCS is able to measure only hemoglobin and melanin. NCS is,
however, extremely flexible allowing imaging of full faces, or, indeed, any body part (if the
Figure 7
Changes in hydration levels in human skin (same area) following application of a topical moisturizer
(before and 10 minutes after application). “Dry” skin (left) and “moisturized” skin (right) with pseudocolor scale
indicating hydration state.
Spectrophotometric Intracutaneous Analysis
279

=== Page 297 ===
camera is used apart from the stand). Apart from the ability to measure large fields, NCS also
has the advantage of eliminating the potential artifacts of pressure “blanching” that can
potentially occur with any skin contact measure (Fig. 8).
Figure 9 shows NCS melanin and hemoglobin SIAscans. Localized subsurface hyper-
pigmentation can clearly be seen in the melanin SIAscan and telangiectasia in the hemoglobin
SIAscan.
Because the NCS technique now allows routine acquisition of full-face melanin and
hemoglobin chromophore maps, the method has proven an ideal clinical partner in assessing
the effects of cosmetic treatments. In a recent double-blinded study, NCS was used to provide
a quantitative means of measuring the effect of a vehicle containing 2% N-acetyl glucosamine
(NAG) and 4% niacinamide (N) versus a vehicle control, applied topically, full-face, twice-
daily for eight weeks, to two groups of 100 females aged 40 to 60 years, respectively, on
melanized hyperpigmented spots (11). Analysis of the NCS melanin maps demonstrated clear
treatment effects for the NAG þ N combination versus vehicle control, resulting in a
significant (p < 0.05) reduction in melanin spot area fraction and a significant (p < 0.05)
increase in melanin evenness.
Finally, it should be noted that a separate study has shown an excellent correlation
between NCS-derived melanin concentrations and eumelanin concentrations in human skin
biopsies, spanning Fitzpatrick skin types I-VI (12). It must be concluded, therefore, that large-
field chromophore mapping by NCS brings a new level of sensitivity and specificity to
measurement of human skin color.
Figure 8
Noncontact SIAscopy in use.
Figure 9
NCS images with (left to right) cross-polarized color, melanin, and hemoglobin maps.
280
Matts and Cotton

=== Page 298 ===
CONCLUSION
Whereas even modern high-resolution imaging still only describes skin appearance, SIAscopy
explains it by separating the molecular components responsible for that appearance in the first
place. In this way, SIAscopy provides the clinician and researcher alike with a powerful new
tool to both measure and characterize human skin.
REFERENCES
1. Cotton S. A non-invasive system for assisting in the diagnosis of malignant melanoma. PhD thesis,
University of Birmingham, 1998.
2. Hunter J, Moncrieff M, Hall P, et al. The diagnostic characteristics of siascopy versus dermoscopy for
pigmented skin lesions presenting in primary care. Poster presentation: British Association of
Dermatologists conference; UK; 2006.
3. Claridge E, Cotton S, Hall P, et al. From colour to tissue histology: Physics based interpretation of
images of pigmented skin lesions. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention –
MICCAI’2002, 2002; I:730–738.
4. Anderson RR, Parish JA. The optics of human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 77(1).
5. Prahl SA, Keijzer M, Jacques SL, et al. A monte carlo model of light propagation in tissue. SPIE
Institue Series 1989; 5.
6. Asserin J, Heuse`le C, Andre´ P, et al. Comparison of two techniques used in the evaluation of the
depigmentation effect of cosmetic products on brown spots. Poster presentation: Socie´te´ Franc¸aise
d’Inge´nierie Cutane´e 2009; 319.
7. Matts PJ, Cotton SD. Chromophore mapping: a new technique to characterise and measure ageing
human skin, in vivo. European Academy of Dermatology 14th Congress, 2005.
8. Cotton S. Examining the topology and dryness of the stratum corneum with a standard siascope. Int J
Cosmet Sci 2007; 29(3):219.
9. Morgan SP, Stockford IM. Surface-reflection elimination in polarization imaging of superficial tissue.
Opt Lett 2003; 28:114–116.
10. Preece S, Cotton S, Claridge E. Imaging the pigments of skin with a technique which is invariant
to changes in surface geometry and intensity of illuminating light. Med Image Underst Anal 2003;
145–148.
11. Matts PJ, Miyamoto K, Bissett DL, et al. The Use of Chromophore Mapping to Measure the Effects of a
Topical N-Acetyl Glucosamine/Niacinamide Complex on Pigmentation in Human Skin. American
Academy of Dermatology 64th Annual Conference, 2006.
12. Matts PJ, Dykes PJ, Marks R. The distribution of melanin in skin determined in vivo. Br J Dermatol
2007; 156:620–628.
Spectrophotometric Intracutaneous Analysis
281

=== Page 300 ===
26
The Visioscan-Driven ULEV and SELS Methods
Pascale Quatresooz and Ge´rald E. Pie´rard
Department of Dermatopathology, University Hospital of Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
Melanocytes and melanins are largely responsible for the phototype-related color of the skin. The
varied colors of skin depend on the nature, amount, size, and distribution of melanin pigment
produced by melanocytes and transferred to keratinocytes. The system is governed by the
epidermal melanin unit corresponding to a functional entity composed of one melanocyte and its
neighboring keratinocytes into which the melanosomes are transferred. Chronic ultraviolet (UV)
radiation provides a positive signal to the exposed epidermal melanin unit. In this instance, the
number of active melanocytes increases, and individual melanocytes are stimulated to produce
more melanins. In addition, melanosome transfer from melanocytes to the surrounding
keratinocytes is enhanced through the intervention of the protease-activated receptor 2 (1).
According to the individual melanin phenotype, age, and cumulative UV exposure, the
skin commonly develops a discrete-to-severe mottled appearance. Freckles in youths and
solar lentigines in older individuals are the clinical representatives of these influences. Such
aspects are due to an increase in the keratinocyte melanin content (melanotic hypermelanosis),
which may or may not be associated with melanocytic hyperplasia. The resulting mottled
pigmentation is an early key feature of photoaging.
Photography under UVA light, which is highly absorbed by melanin, is a convenient
way to highlight any discrete variation in skin pigmentation. Provided that the lighting is kept
constant and the camera calibrated beforehand, this technique highlights any change in
pigmentation. By using a UVA source, any skin blemish can thus be conveniently assessed by a
regular photography system (2–7). As such, UV photography is used as a diagnostic tool, but it
has rarely been employed for measuring pigmentation. Indeed, the latter application is not
satisfactory because casual equipments generate shadows superposed to the skin pigmenta-
tion. To respond to this drawback, a charge couple device (CCD) camera equipped with an
internal UV-emitting unit (VisioScan1 VC98, CþK electronic, Cologne, Germany) was
developed (Fig. 1). The video sensor chip must be closely applied to the skin surface to avoid
shadows. The uniform illumination of the skin brings out a sharp picture of a 6 mm  8 mm area
of the skin surface. The high resolution of the system allows close assessments of the skin. The
connection of the VisioScan VC98 to the computer is made through an image digitalization unit,
which configures the image in pixels of 256 gray levels, where 0 is black and 256 is white.
This leads to the so-called UV-light enhanced visualization (ULEV) method.
SUBCLINICAL MELANODERMA
The mosaic subclinical melanoderma (MSM) is a mottled pattern enhanced under ULEV
examination (8,9). This feature is particularly prominent in photosensitive individuals with a
phaeomelanin-enriched phenotype. Using this method, the increased contrast between the
faint or almost invisible hyperpigmentation and the surrounding skin is the combined result of
a greater reflection of UVA than visible light by collagen, and its greater absorption by melanin
inside the epidermis. The boundary between the subclinical melanoderma and the
surrounding skin is sharply marked. Since UV rays penetrate less deeply into the skin than
visible light, it is considered that UV photography and the ULEV method catch mainly the
pigmentation inside the epidermis. Thus, the pigments localized in the dermis are not
detectable using these methods. Therefore, a clear distinction can be made using ULEV
between an enhanced melanotic hypermelanosis and a dermal melanoderma. This distinction
is useful because the former type is accessible to treatment and the latter type is unresponsive
and remains as a melanin tattoo. These two conditions coexist, for instance, in melasma.

=== Page 301 ===
Several MSM patterns have been identified (8–11). They are listed in Table 1. Spotty
perifollicular dots (Fig. 2) are commonly seen on the scalp and face, occasionally extending to
other seborrheic regions (8,10–12). This physiological pattern is recognized as early as during
adolescence, and it does not seem altered by aging. By contrast, the interfollicular region
exhibits a combination of pinpoint lesions, small macules, and globular macules (Fig. 3). This
pattern appears later in life and is subject to variations with cumulative photoexposure and
aging. These hypermelanotic blemishes may become confluent, and they appear more
prominent on chronically sun-exposed skin. This aspect is regarded as an early sign of
Figure 2
Perifollicular dots of subclin-
ical melanoderma.
Figure 1
VisioScan camera.
Table 1
Patterns of Subclinical Skin Mottling
. Pinpoint: minute irregularly distributed darker spots
. Follicular dots: speckled perifollicular darker rings
. Small macules: small interfollicular darker areas
. Globular macules: accretive and circinate confluence of smaller macules
. Streaky macules: elongated darker areas along wrinkles
. Confluent macules: massive darker areas
284
Quatresooz and Pie´rard

=== Page 302 ===
photoaging (9,13,14). Still another aspect is given by the streaky pattern elongated along
wrinkles. This aspect is typically present on the sunny side slope of facial frown lines (8).
ASSESSMENT OF WHITENING AGENTS
The ULEV method can be employed for assessing the efficacy of cosmetic whitening products
(8,15–18). Image analysis of the pictures offers objective quantification of the depigmenting
effect on the epidermal melanin unit. The method has been applied to the assessment of
“brown spots” (Fig. 4) corresponding to solar lentigines or incipient pigmented seborrheic
keratoses (15,16,18). Such evaluations are more easily handled than the bleaching effect on
melasma (17). Using the ULEV method, the observed effects of whitening agents cannot be
distinguished according to the putative biological effects on tyrosinase, protease-activated
receptor 2 or any other step of melanization.
Beyond conventional cosmetic whitening agents, some drugs can alter the activity of the
epidermal melanin unit. Both topical corticosteroids and vitamin D analogues decrease the
MSM severity as assessed by the ULEV method (14).
SKIN SURFACE MICRORELIEF AND SCALINESS
The quantitative evaluation of the skin surface microrelief is of interest in assessing some of the
therapeutic and cosmetic interventions as well as for the determination of the severity in
irritation damages to the skin. A measurement where the skin can be directly monitored
Figure 3
Macular interfollicular subclini-
cal melanoderma.
Figure 4
“Brown spot” on photoaged
skin.
The Visioscan-Driven ULEV and SELS Methods
285

=== Page 303 ===
optically using an image digitalization process without any sampling or replica collection
should represent a great advance in technology (19–21).
The regular observation of ULEV pictures reveals any hyperkeratotic and scaly aspect of
the skin surface. The lesions look whitish in contrast with the gray aspect of the normal-
looking skin (19–21). The SELS (surface evaluation of living skin) method is an additional way,
allowing direct and noninvasive measurement of the skin topography using the VisioScan
camera (22). The actual picture of the skin can be presented with false colors and viewed either
two dimensionally or tridimensionally. Four different parameters have been selected to be
displayed and analyzed in the evaluation of the skin surface. Skin smoothness (SEsm) is
calculated from the average width and depth of the wrinkles. Skin roughness (SEr) represents
the opposite parameter to the first. Scaliness parameter (SEsc) aims at representing the level of
dryness of the stratum corneum (SC). The wrinkle parameter (SEw) is calculated from the
proportion of horizontal and vertical wrinkles.
In the SELS assessment, swelling the stratum corneum with water or a moisturizer does
not appear to affect the roughness of the skin surface, but the value of the scaliness parameter
and the number of wrinkles decrease, while smoothness increases.
The UVA of the VisioScan VC98 highlights desquamation (Fig. 5). A semiquantitative
assessment is possible, but the interpretation of data is not always straightforward. For
improving this assessment using the VisioScan, the transparent, sticky Corneofix1 F20 tape
(CþK electronic, Cologne, Germany) is slightly pressed onto the skin surface. The superficial
corneocytes stick to the tape and are harvested for the assessment of their numbers and sizes.
As the light is absorbed differently because of the different thickness of corneocyte clumps,
they appear as dark pixels in the image. Looking at the gray level distribution in the histogram,
a quantitative assessment can be performed. The regular VisioScan software distinguishes five
scaliness levels. The drawback of this automatic cutting is that the shutter does not properly
recognize the background in some images. In these instances, the observer can set the shutter
manually by comparing the original and the segmented image with an accuracy of 0.1%.
COMEDOGENESIS
Microcomedones and keratin-filled funnel-like acroinfundibula can be easily identified using ULEV
examination (Figs. 6 and 7). The method can thus be useful in the assessment of comedogenic and
comedolytic compounds. Acne physiopathology is also highlighted by this method.
SEBUM EXCRETION
Sebum flow dynamics can be assessed using lipid-sensitive films (23). The assessment
benefits from image analysis of the sebum-enriched spots. The VisioScan VC98 camera can be
used for that purpose (24). The head of the camera is covered by the opaque microporous
lipid sensitive Sebufix1 F16 tape (CþK electronic, Cologne, Germany) before being applied to
Figure 5
Scaly aspect of the skin.
286
Quatresooz and Pie´rard

=== Page 304 ===
the skin. After about 30 seconds, the mean instant sebum follicular output (SFO) corresponding
to the area of the transparent spots of lipid droplets is assessed using computerized image
analysis (Fig. 8). The face of the Sebufix F16 in contact with the skin is glue free. Thus, the sebum
can enter the micropores of the sebum-sensitive foil without any restriction. This leads to a short
Figure 7
Open comedones.
Figure 6
Microcomedones.
Figure 8
Sebum droplets in a
Sebufix foil.
The Visioscan-Driven ULEV and SELS Methods
287

=== Page 305 ===
measuring time after which the foil is ready to be evaluated. This requirement is important to
avoid any occlusion effect. Indeed, occlusion leads to stratum corneum swelling and to
increasing skin temperature, thus influencing the sebum measurements.
The more oily the skin, the shorter the collecting time is necessary. Studies performed
any time after cleansing the skin is thus possible. The supplied holder presses the lipid-
sensitive film lightly but constantly on the skin and leads to reproducible measurements. The
special foil specifically measures the sebum output from the follicular reservoir. With this
procedure, the sebum output at the skin surface can be monitored live in real time.
HAIR GRAYING
The loss of melanin content in the hair shaft is a natural manifestation of aging leading to
apparent hair whitening. Hair graying can be observed as early as 20 years of age in Caucasians
and 30 years in Africans; it has been reported that on average, in a cohort of Caucasians, 50% of
people had at least 50% gray hair by age 50 (25). The biological processes underlying hair
graying remain unclear (26). In addition, the process of hair graying is difficult to assess and
quantify in vivo. The ULEV method highlights this physiological phenomenon by enhancing the
contrast between graying hair, which appear bright white, and the other hair shafts (Fig. 9).
TRICHOBACTERIOSIS
Some bacterial species tend to clump along hair shafts. They are embedded in a biofilm. This
condition corresponds to trichobacteriosis formerly called trichomycosis. The ULEV method is
a convenient way to observe these structures, which appear as bright white sheaths encasing
the base of the hair shafts (Fig. 10). This aspect is probably related to the fluorescence exhibited
Figure 9
Gray hairs dispersed in nor-
mally pigmented hairs.
Figure 10
Trichobacteriosis character-
ized by bacterial sheaths encasing hairs.
288
Quatresooz and Pie´rard

=== Page 306 ===
by trichobacteriosis under Wood’s light. A similar phenomenon can occur at the site of other
fluorescent lesions such as erythrasma and pityriasis (tinea) versicolor.
DANDRUFF ASSESSMENTS
Under ULEV examination, dandruffs appear as small white objects dispersed along hair shafts
(27,28). Because of the high contrast with hair, a quantitative assessment is made possible
without any specific sampling procedure.
RISK ASSESSMENT OF SKIN CANCERS
A correlation was found between MSM severity and the risk for developing actinic keratoses
and basal cell carcinomas on facial skin and the scalp (29–34). A peculiar aspect corresponds to
focal depigmentation suggesting the destruction of some epidermal melanin units (Fig. 11).
Such finding could help in identifying early adult life subjects at risk of skin cancers.
CONCLUSION
UVA photography and its more recent development, using a CCD camera equipped with an
internal UVA-emitting unit, are useful by different aspects. The MSM revealed by the ULEV method
is one of the earliest clinical signs of photoaging. The same method also highlights scaliness and
desquamation as well as a series of other potential specific conditions mentioned in this chapter.
REFERENCES
1. Seiberg M, Paine C, Sharlow E, et al. The protease-activated receptor 2 regulates pigmentation via
keratinocytes-melanocyte interactions. Exp Cell Res 2000; 254:25–32.
2. Gilchrest BA, Fitzpatrick TB, Anderson RR, et al. Localization of melanin pigmentation in the skin
with Wood’s lamp. Br J Dermatol 1977; 96:245–248.
3. Kikuchi I, Idermori M, Uchimura H, et al. Reflection ultraviolet photography as surface photography
of the skin. J Dermatol 1983; 10:551–555.
4. Masuda Y, Takei K, Mizugaki M. Quantification of the face brown spots and freckles with image
analysis method. J Soc Cosmet Chem Jpn 1996; 28:147.
5. Arai S. Analysis of pigmentation of human skin (UV-light images). In: Wilhem KP, Elsner P,
Berardesca, Maibach HI, eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Skin Surface Imaging and Analysis. Boca
Raton: CRC Press, 1997:85–94.
6. Fulton JE. Utilizing the ultraviolet (UV detect) camera to enhance the appearance of photodamage
and other skin conditions. Dermatol Surg 1997; 23:163–169.
7. Kollias N, Gillies R, Cohen-Goihman C, et al. Fluorescence photography in the evaluation of
hyperpigmentation in photodamaged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1997; 36:226–230.
Figure 11
Area of depigmented skin in
the background of mosaic subclinical
melanoderma.
The Visioscan-Driven ULEV and SELS Methods
289

=== Page 307 ===
8. Hermanns JF, Petit L, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Unravelling the patterns of subclinical phaeomelanin-
enriched facial hyperpigmentation. Effect of depigmenting agents. Dermatology 2000; 201:118–122.
9. Petit L, Fougouang L, Uhoda I, et al. Regional variability in mottled photo-induced melanoderma in
the elderly. Exp Gerontol 2003; 38:327–331.
10. Petit L, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Saint Le´ger D, et al. Subclinical speckled perifollicular melanosis of
the scalp. Eur J Dermatol 2002; 12:565–568.
11. Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Hermanns JF, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Highlighting the rim of perifollicular
epidermal unit. Eur J Dermatol 2006; 16:225–229.
12. Uhoda E, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Petit L, et al. The conundrum of skin pores in dermoscosmetology.
Dermatology 2005; 210:3–7.
13. Barel AO, Alewaeters K, Clarys P. Optical imaging using UV light for the determination of
photoageing. Skin Res Technol 1999; 5:126.
14. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Paquet P, Quatresooz P, et al. Smoothing the mosaic subclinical melanoderma
by calcipotriol. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2007; 21:657–661.
15. Hermanns JF, Petit L, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Assessment of topical hypopigmenting agents on
solar lentigines of Asian women. Dermatology 2002; 204:281–286.
16. Petit L, Pie´rard GE. Analytic quantification of solar lentigines lightening by a 2% hydroquinone-
cyclodextrin formulation. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2003; 17:546–549.
17. Thirion L, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. Whitening effect of a dermocosmetic formulation.
A randomized double-blind controlled study on melasma. Int J Cosmet Sci 2006; 28(4):263–267.
18. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Henry F, Quatresooz P, et al. Analytic quantification of the bleaching effect of
a 4-hydroxyanisole-tretinoin combination on actinic lentigines. J Drugs Dermatol 2008; (7):873–878.
19. Pena Ferreira R, Costa P, Bahia F. Visioscan VC 98 application: a comparison study between coarse
and smooth surface. Skin Res Technol 2003; 9:204–205.
20. Uhoda E, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Petit L, et al. Skin weathering and ashiness in black Africans. Eur J
Dermatol 2003; 13:574–578.
21. Uhoda E, Petit L, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Ultraviolet light-enhanced visualization of cutaneous
signs of carotene and vitamin A dietary deficiency. Acta Clin Belg 2004; 59:97–101.
22. Tronnier H, Wiebuch M, Heinrich U, et al. Surface evaluation of living skin. Adv Exp Med Biol 1999;
455:507–516.
23. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Martalo O, Richard A, et al. Sebum rheology evaluated by two methods
in vivo. Split-face study of the effect of a cosmetic formulation. Eur J Dermatol 1999; 9:455–457.
24. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. Postmenopausal aging of the sebaceous follicle: a comparison
between women receiving hormone replacement therapy or not. Dermatology 2002; 204:17–22.
25. Keogh EV, Walsh RJ. Rate of graying of human hair. Nature 1965; 207:877–878.
26. Tobin DJ, Paus R. Graying: gerontology of the hair follicle pigmentary unit. Exp Dermatol 2001; 36:29–54.
27. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Pie´rard GE. Revisiting dandruff. Int J Cosmet Sci 2006;
28(5):311–318.
28. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Uhoda E, Pie´rard GE. Quantification of dandruff adherence to hair. Int J
Cosmet Sci 2005; 27(5):279–282.
29. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE. He´liodermie he´te´rochrome et risque de cancers cutane´s. Rev Med
Lie`ge 1998; 53:355–356.
30. Hermanns JF, Henry F, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Quantification analytique du vieillissement du
syste`me me´lnaocytaire. Implication dans la determination objective du risque de cancers cutane´s.
Ann Gerontol 2001; 15:233–239.
31. Quatresooz P, Petit L, Uhoda I, et al. Mosaic subclinical melanoderma : an Achilles heel for UV-
related epidermal carcinogenesis. Int J Oncol 2004; 25:1763–1767.
32. Quatresooz P, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Henry F, et al. Me´lanodermie infraclinique et cancers photo-
induits. In: Uhoda E, Paye M, Pie´rard GE, eds. Actualite´s en Inge´nierie Cutane´e. Vol. 4. Paris: Publ.
Eska, 2006:67–73.
33. Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE, et al. Hairlessness scalp weathering. A
study using skin capacitance imaging and ultraviolet light-enhanced visualisation. Clin Exp Dermatol
(in press).
34. Quatresooz P, Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Pie´rard-Franchimont C, et al. Actinic keratoses and field
cancerization in bald-headed. Finetuning their detection using the ultraviolet light-enhanced
visualisation (ULEV) method. Arch Dermatol Res (in press).
290
Quatresooz and Pie´rard

=== Page 308 ===
27
New Trends in Antiaging Cosmetic Ingredients
and Treatments: An Overview
Peter Clarys and Andre´ O. Barel
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
Aging is a natural process in which both intrinsic aging, also described as biological aging, and
photoaging lead progressively to a loss of structural integrity and physiological function of the
skin (1–4).
With intrinsic aging, structural changes occur in the skin as a natural consequence of the
biological changes over time and produce a certain number of histological, physiological, and
biochemical modifications. Intrinsic aging is determined genetically (influence of gender and
ethnic group), variable in function of skin site, and also influenced by hormonal changes.
Visually it is characterized by fine wrinkles. By comparison, “photoaging” is the term used to
describe the changes occurring in the skin, resulting from repetitive exposure to sunlight. The
histological, physiological, and biochemical changes in the different layers of the skin are much
more drastic. As a result, the photodamaged skin may present various symptoms such as deep
wrinkles, actinic keratoses, solar elastosis, yellowing, pigmentation disorders and premalig-
nant lesions, skin atrophy, senile purpura, telangiectasia, laxity, and roughness.
The demographic changes in the industrialized populations (United States, Europe, and
Japan) are the consequence of the rise in the number of elderly persons: the life expectancy for
men (about 80 years of age) and women (far above 80 years). Women with a longer average life
expectancy will spend a long lifetime in the menopausal status. They will enjoy their leisure
time and are very much aware of the concept of preservation of the youthful appearance (face
and whole body) and good health (4). These categories of seniors (3 or 4  20 years) have more
financial means to spend on cosmetic products than do the very young population. Consumers
are focused on their health and appearance, creating a great demand for antiaging cosmetic
and oral treatments. We observe the following trends in these demands: an appeal for
“Green and Natural,” more natural and less invasive cosmetic substitutes instead of cosmetic
surgery and skin injections without the side effects. Modern topical antiaging cosmetic
products can be characterized as cosmeceutical preparations: formulated with “natural,”
functional active ingredients and with innovative delivery systems (penetration enhancers,
nanoparticles, and porous delivery systems) (5). The entrance of a large number of men older
than 60 years, who like women want to preserve their appearance and good health, has
provoked the development of a specific range of skin care and antiaging products for men. The
aims of this chapter are (i) to describe the histological, physiological, biophysical, and
biochemical characteristics of biological aging and photoaging, respectively, (ii) to describe the
clinical visual and tactile examinations and bioengineering methods to qualify and/or quantify
these symptoms, and (iii) to give a critical overview of the different topical antiaging cosmetic
ingredients and treatments. Also, oral antiaging food supplement will be mentioned. Excellent
review articles on skin aging have been published (1–4,6).
INTRINSIC SKIN AGING
Intrinsic aging or chronologic or biological aging is, by definition, unavoidable, since it
represents the biological effect of time on the skin, which is not influenced by repetitive sun
exposure. The skin that normally ages is smooth with some deepening of the surface (small
wrinkles) and loss of isotropy in the microrelief. Histologically, there is an epidermal and
dermal atrophy, gradual reduction in the amount of collagen, hyperkeratosis, and some
atrophy—a reduced number of melanocytes, Langerhans cells, and fibroblasts. A shortening in
telomere DNA and metabolic oxidative damage are believed to play a major role in the

=== Page 309 ===
intrinsic aging process. Also, the glycation reaction on skin proteins occurs with time and
contributes to the intrinsic aging (see the chapter “Glycation End Products” by Declercq et al.) (7).
The synergy of intrinsic aging and photoaging during the life span produces a deterioration of
the cutaneous barrier. Aged skin is more susceptible to extreme dryness, itching, cutaneous
infections, autoimmune disorders, vascular complications, lack of elasticity, and an increased
risk for premalignant and malignant lesions. The major intrinsic skin aging factors are anatomical
variations, gender, ethnicity, and hormonal changes (4).
Ethnicity
It is obvious that differences in pigmentation have the greatest effect on aging. High levels of
melanin pigmentation are protective with regard to aging. Black skin shows smaller differences
between exposed and unexposed sites. Skin cancer incidence rates between white Caucasian and
Africans indicate that pigmentation provides a significant level of protection from UV radiation.
It appears that wrinkling in Asian skin occurs later and with less severity than in Caucasian skin,
probably due to ethnicity but also due to differences in lifestyle and diet. For a complete recent
review of the properties of skin related to race, sex, and site, the reader is referred to the chapter
“Biophysical Characteristics of the Skin: Relation to Race, Sex, Age, and Site” by Couturaud (8).
Anatomical Skin Sites
Large variations in some skin properties (hydration, transepidermal water loss, epidermal
lipids, sebum secretion, and mechanical properties) have been observed with respect to the
studied body site. There are also large differences in skin thickness in function of the body site,
ranging from very thin on the eyelids to more than 5 mm on the sole of the feet. A regional
variation is clearly observed when considering the quantity and composition of lipids in the
stratum corneum. Because of thickness and sebum secretion, the viscoelastic properties of the
skin are very different at the forehead, nose, and cheeks compared with the forearm.
Gender and Hormonal Changes in Cutaneous Tissues
The influence of gender on the physicochemical properties of the skin is often reported in the
literature (8); however, no clear-cut conclusive information on the influence of sex on intrinsic
aging is reported. Nevertheless, there are significant morphological differences according to
sex: total skin thickness is greater for men on most skin sites.
The changes of estrogen levels in the female skin when comparing pre- with
postmenopausal women have well been described in the literature. Intrinsic aging in men is
a progressive phenomenon: one observes a smooth decline in skin properties in function of
time. The same curve shows clearly a sharp acceleration of decline around 50 to 60 years,
which corresponds to the passage from pre- to postmenopause.
EXTRINSIC SKIN AGING
Chronic repetitive exposure of human skin to solar UV rays causes marked morphological,
histological, biochemical, and biophysical changes that are described as photoaging. As
already mentioned here above, the clinical signs of photoaging are fine and coarse wrinkles,
actinic keratoses, solar elastosis, yellowing, pigmentation disorders and premalignant lesions,
skin atrophy, senile purpura, freckles, solar comedones, telangiectasia, laxity, roughness, and
extreme dryness. Most of the alterations are apparent in the dermis of photoaged skin and
include massive accumulation of abnormal elastic fibers, loss of collagen, and increase of
GlycoAminoGlycans (GAGs). The fibrous network degenerates into amorphous masses
modifying the structure of the matrix. UV-mediated damage to elastic fibers and fibroblasts
provokes the accumulation of this elastotic material. Alteration in the dermal extracellular matrix
in photoaged skin could involve the production of abnormal matrix molecules by the fibroblasts.
Also is noted the increase of activity of metal-binding matrix-degrading enzymes (9).
Exposure to UV Light
Research in the field of photaging has resulted in a better understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of the aging process. UV light penetrates skin, and depending on its wavelength,
it interacts with different skin layers located at different depths. Shorter wavelengths (UVB,
292
Clarys and Barel

=== Page 310 ===
280–320 nm) are mostly absorbed in the epidermis, affecting predominantly keratinocytes.
Longer-wavelength UV light (UVA, 320–340 nm) penetrates deeper and can interact with
keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts. The melanin-pigmented cells absorb UV light and thus
protect skin cells from exposure to UV radiation. UVA light mostly acts indirectly through
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). “ROS” is a general term for oxygen-derived
species (superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical, and certain peroxides). ROS exert a multitude of
effects such as lipid peroxidation, activation of matrix metalloproteinases and generation of
DNA, and mitochondrial DNA damage (10,11). UVB light can also generate ROS, its main
mechanism of action is the interaction with DNA, provoking DNA damage. The skin presents
an antioxidant defense mechanism, including an enzymatic and nonenzymatic system. As an
enzymatic system, we have superoxide dismutases, catalase and a selenium glutathione
peroxidase, converting superoxide anion in hydrogen peroxide and hydrogen peroxide in
water, respectively. As endogenous antioxidants we find glutathione, a-lipoic acid, coenzyme
Q, etc. Other antioxidants, such as vitamins and polyphenolic compounds, can be obtained
from diet. An increase of ROS (depletion of the antioxidant system) will cause oxidative stress,
leading to potential tissue damage.
Sun damage also creates a state of chronic inflammation, with the release of proteolytic
enzymes by the inflammatory system, disrupting the dermal matrix (1). Sunburn is a well-
known acute effect of sun exposure and is clinically visible as an erythema triggered by
inflammation. After a certain threshold of UV exposure is reached, a delayed and prolonged
vasodilatation allows the passage of lymphocytes and macrophages in the tissues, which
induces inflammation, leading to a histological appearance of chronic inflammation (9). The
intake of antioxidants or anti-inflammatory compounds was suggested to reduce erythema
provoked by UV irradiation (11).
Effect of Smoking
It is now well established that smoking has an aggravating effect on skin aging. Cigarette
smoke represents one of the greatest exogenous sources of free radicals. The skin is diectly and
intensively exposed to cigarette smoke and to smoke from exhalation. Even external exposure
to cigarette smoke (secondhand cigarette smoke) prematurely ages the skin. Smoking provokes
elastosis, telangiectasia, skin roughness, and premature wrinkles on facial skin due to the
vascular constriction of nicotine (12). A clear dose-response relationship has been observed
between smoking and wrinkling (4). Smoking also increases ROS formation and is an important
risk for cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
DESCRIPTION OF THE DIFFERENT OBJECTIVE
EVALUATIONS OF PHOTOAGING
Evaluation of Microrelief and Wrinkles
Wrinkles in the Facial Skin
Facial wrinkles are the most characteristic morphological changes observed in photoaged skin.
Therefore, many quantificative methods to analyze wrinkles have been developed (13). First,
direct visual evaluation of the face (front and lateral views) and rating of different well-
selected aspects of photoaging (fine and coarse wrinkle, roughness, yellowing solar lentigines)
by experienced examinators using a numerical scale are very popular in use and rather simple
to carry out. The subjects themselves can judge their degree of photoaging and the efficacy of
cosmetic products on the severity of wrinkles. Different clinical studies have shown that there
is more or less a good correlation between the rating of the subjects and the evaluation of
experienced investigators. Although visual evaluation is rather subjective and evaluator
dependent, both methods are widely used in clinical testing of wrinkle-smoothing products.
The same visual evaluation of the face can be carried out on macro digital photographic
pictures obtained using a standard setup for positioning the face of the subject and lateral
illumination. Evaluation of the wrinkles using silicone skin replicas has been employed
complementary to visual examinations. Skin microrelief and coarse wrinkles (crow’s feet) can
be taken using these replicas. Many techniques using different principles are now available to
analyze the replicas (mechanical and laser profilometry, two-dimensional image analysis,
confocal micoscopy, etc.).
New Trends in Antiaging Cosmetic Ingredients and Treatments
293

=== Page 311 ===
In vivo instruments have been developed to study directly the morphological structure
of the skin. The PRIMOS1 system is based on the image analysis with image triangulation
using a micro-mirror device projection on the skin (14). It is possible to measure the skin
topography by using a UVA-light video camera Visioscan VC981 with a SELS1 software
(Surface Evaluation of the Living Skin) technique providing the standard roughness
parameters (Rt, Rm, Rz, and Rp) (15). The microrelief of the skin surface and particularly
the isotropy/anisotropy of this microrelief can be evaluated from the images obtained using a
charge coupled device (CCD) visible video camera (Intuiskin IntuiPro Pack1, Crolles, France).
Image analysis gives the classical roughness parameters and the degree of anisotropy of the
skin surface (16).
Reviscometer1 (17)
Aged skin is characterized, among other symptoms, by profound changes in the orientation of
the collagen fibers in the dermis. In young skin, these fibers are very small and oriented almost
in all directions (isotropy). When the skin gets older, thickening of the fibers occurs with a
preferential orientation of the thick collagen fibers (anisotropy). The degree of isotropy/
anisotropy in the dermis can be evaluated by measuring the propagation speed of an acoustic
shock wave applied on the skin surfaces following different orientations with a Reviscometer1
(18). The propagation speed of a shock wave applied on the skin surface at different angles
gives a degree of isotropy/anisotropy clearly related to skin aging.
Viscoelastic Properties of the Skin Using the Cutometer1
Photoaging will provoke profound changes in the structure of the dermis and consequently
changes in the mechanical properties of this layer. The Cutometer1 (19) is a suction device that
measures the vertical displacement of the skin when a small vacuum (suction) is applied on the
surface. The vertical displacement of the skin can be measured in function of vacuum (stree-
strain curve) or in function of time when suddenly vacuum is applied and released (strain-time
curve). From the strain versus time curve, the pure elastic, pure elastic recovery, and viscoelastic
properties can be quantified and are clearly related to the degree of aging and skin laxity.
Ultrasound Measurements at 20 MHz
Querleux et al. (20) described on echographic pictures of photoaged skin, between the
epidermis and reticular dermis, a dark echogenic band, which has been called subepidermal
low echogenic band (SLEB). Several studies have proposed that the evaluation of the SLEB
(thickness, number of low echogenic pixels, and the ratio of the number of pixels in the SLEB to
the number of pixels in the deeper dermis) to be markers of photoaging (21–23). Also, the mean
total thickness of the dermis and its density can be computed.
Hydration Measurements
Typical photoaged skin shows symptoms of roughness and dryness, although extreme dryness
(ichtyosis) can be present on nonexposed skin areas (lower part of the legs in very old persons).
Typical hydrating and smoothing products are used in the treatment of dryness. In addition,
most antiaging cosmetic preparations contain hydrating ingredients and skin-smoothing
ingredients. Quantitative hydration evaluation of the upper layers of the skin, e.g., horny layer
and upper epidermis, are numerous: electrical impedance and capacitance measurements (24),
Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy with an attenuated total reflection unit, FTATR (25),
and confocal Raman microscopy (26). The last two instruments, although they give quantitative
data directly related to the amount of water present in the horny layer, are less used in routine
clinical research because of the high price of purchase. Most routine hydration measurements
are carried out using the electrical impedance/conductance properties [Dermalab1, Hadsund,
Denmark (27), Skicon1, Hamamatsu, Japan (28), DPM Nova1, Portsmouth, New Hampshire
(29)] or capacitance properties [Corneometer1, Cologne: Germany (30) and MoistureMeter1,
Kuopio, Finland (31)] of an alternating electric current applied on the skin surface. It must be
pointed out that the data of these instruments (electrical units or arbitrary units) are related to
hydration but not linearly proportional to the percentage of water present in the horny layer.
294
Clarys and Barel

=== Page 312 ===
CRITICAL OVERVIEW OF THE TOPICAL ANTIAGING
INGREDIENTS AND TREATMENTS
Before starting to give an overview of the different categories of antiaging ingredients, it is
important to make the following remarks.
As mentioned above, the clinical symptoms of photoaging are multiple: fine and coarse
wrinkles, actinic keratoses, solar elastosis, yellowing, pigmentation disorders, premalignant
lesions, skin atrophy, senile purpura, freckles, solar comedones, telangiectasia, laxity, roughness,
and extreme dryness. Obviously, it is impossible with one antiaging cream/gel to treat all these
symptoms simultaneously. Some symptoms such as actinic keratoses, purpura, pigmentation
disorder, or telangiectasia can be reduced only with focused treatments containing specific
ingredients. For example, a skin-whitening product, which reduces skin pigmentation problems
on the face, hands, and arms.
As a consequence, we will discuss in this chapter the most cited clinical symptoms of
photoaging, such as fine and coarse wrinkles, skin laxity, roughness, and dryness. With the
exception of dryness (horny layer), these clinical symptoms are related to major alteration of
the dermis.
Cosmetic or Cosmeceutical Antiaging Products?
The antiaging “active” ingredients, which will be described hereafter, are cosmetic products with
properties very similar to a pharmaceutical product (drug-like benefits)—cosmeceuticals (32,33).
However, the EEC legislation and particularly the FDA do not recognize such category as
“cosmeceuticals” and consider these formulations as cosmetic products. The term cosmeceutical
or its synonym terminology is often misused in cosmetic advertising and may be misleading to
the consumer. He interprets a cosmeceutical to be similar to a pharmaceutical product and that
these formulations have passed with success the tests for efficacy, safety, and quality control as
required for a medical preparation (33). Indeed, product testing may also be warranted by the
companies to document claimed efficacy and to support marketing (34). Generally speaking, the
quality control testing on ingredients and safety testing are of good quality, and the used
ingredients are mostly safe. However, these ingredients may not be as efficient as claimed, and
the concentrations used in these formulations will not necessarily correspond to an “effective”
concentration. This can be the case with many plant extracts with antioxidant properties. There
are no proven effective topical antiaging ingredients/or treatment that completely eliminates the
symptoms of skin photoaging, but there are products and treatments that can visibly reduce or
slow down these symptoms: it is more correct to consider reduction of the appearance of aged
skin. Many cosmetic products claim to reduce the clinical signs of photoaged skin; however,
there are very few scientific, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical studies to
support these claims (35). Finally, many antiaging claims are based on in vivo testing on cells or
simple skin models but not in vivo on a sufficient number of human subjects.
Moisturizers
The classical moisturizers are used for treating dryness in the photoaged skin: polyols
(glycerin, propylene glycol, butylene glycol and sorbitol), urea, lactic acid and salts, hyaluronic
and salts, pyrrolodone-5-carboxylic acid and salts (PCA), panthenol, amino acids and proteins
(collagen and proteins from wheat, rice, silk, soybean, and oat). See the chapter “Hydrating
Substances” by Lode´n (36). More sophisticated peptides and proteins are presently used as
moisturizers. It concerns generally more lipophylic quaternary N-alkyl derivatives of proteins
or small polypeptides with long side chains (ester binding) to increase the lipophilic character:
binding to the horny layer and a better percutaneous absorption. Recently, the use of small
peptides, which mimic the amino acid sequence of collagen or enzymes (biomimetic peptides),
has been proposed as mosturizers (37). For a better percutaneous penetration, small fragments
of hyaluronic acid were also suggested (38).
Surface-Smoothing Agents
Surface-smoothing silicone derivatives (39) or filmogen proteins such as quaternized proteins or
silk, rice and oat (36), and skin feel agents (40) are used in antiaging products. The high adsorption
to the skin surface provokes a smoothing of the skin surface and is at the same time humectant.
New Trends in Antiaging Cosmetic Ingredients and Treatments
295

=== Page 313 ===
Retinoids
The use of retinoic acid as a topical antiaging ingredient has been extensively investigated. The
efficacy of this topical drug has been scientifically proved: reversing fine wrinkles, non-
homogenous skin pigmentation and rough skin surface (41). However, the typical side effects of
topical application of retinoic acid, known as retinoid dermatitis, occur in most patients:
erythema, scaling, and pruritis limit the use of this topical drug. Cosmetic research on similar
molecules with the same antiaging properties but without the irritant side effects are going on.
Retinol, retinal, and different retinol derivatives (retinyl palmitate ¼ lipophilic derivate and
retinyl propionate ¼ hydrophilic derivative) are frequently proposed in topical antiaging
treatments (42–44). Retinol and retinal must be metabolized in the skin to the active trans-retinoic
acid. The incoporation of retinol and probably also retinal in cosmetic preparations poses the
problem of stability (slow oxidation of retinol in function of time). New delivery systems and
derivatives of retinol may solve the problem of stability of these preparations.
a- and b-Hydroxy Acids
Hydroxy acids such as glycolic acid and lactic acid at lower concentrations than those used in
dermatological peelings are designed to remove the superficial epidermal layers of the skin
and give a younger appearance (exfoliation and rejuvenation) (45,46). There is an effect on the
synthesis of ceramides by the keratinocytes and on the lipidic structure of the stratum corneum
(modulation of the barrier function). Stimulation of the epidermis and dermis cells. Sort of soft
chemical peeling without the side effects of higher concentrations (redness, burning, and
swelling). The use of more lipophilic derivatives of b-hydroxy acid (C8-lipohydroxy acid) has
recently been proposed as a treatment of photoaged skin. The slower rate of penetration of this
soft lipophilic exfoliating agent (reservoir effect in the horny layer) assures an effect at lower
concentration with less side effects (47).
Antioxidants
In the field of cosmetic treatments, antioxidants are widely innovative ingredients in topical
antiaging applications. The chapter “Antioxidants” by Weber et al. gives an overview of the
current state of research on the use of antioxidants in topical cosmeceutical applications (48). The
chapter on “Oral Cosmetics” by Demeester et al. (11) explains the benefits of antioxidants in
antiaging oral cosmetics. The target of these active ingredients is to counter the ROS molecules
produced in the skin. The most important antioxidants are vitamin C (49,50), vitamin E (51,52),
coenzyme Q (53), and a-lipoic acid (54). The combined topical use of retinoids, niacinamide,
N-acetyl glucosamine, and moisturizing peptides has recently been reported (55).
Some double-blind, vehicle-controlled antiaging treatments over long periods have been
reported in the literature.
The topical application of a cream containing a mixture of folic acid and creatine showed
improvements in the mechanical properties of the skin (56). Also, an improvement of the
photoaged dermal matrix by topical application of a cosmetic “antiaging” product containing a
lipoentapeptide, white lupin, and retinyl palmitate was reported by Watson et al. (44).
Plant antioxidants have recently been investigated with promising results: polyphenols
in green tea, soya isoflavones genistein and daidzein, tannins in pomegranate, and resveratrol
in seeds of grape.
The topical use of resveratol, a polyphenol from red grapes with great antioxidant
activity in skin care formulation, has been reported by Baxter (57). The efficacy of soybean
extract against photoaging was investigated in a double-blind, vehicle-controlled clinical
study by Wallo et al. (58), indicating the promise of the soya isoflavones. Finally, the effects
of green tea extracts in the clinical and histological appearance of photoaging skin were
examined by Chiu et al. (59).
UV Filters
Protection of the skin against photoaging is ensured by the use of broad-spectrum UV filters
either by radiation absorption or by light reflection. As a consequence, one reduces the total
lifetime UV dose. Most cosmetic antiaging creams and lotions contain a mixture of UVA and
UVB filters with SPF around 15 to 20.
296
Clarys and Barel

=== Page 314 ===
Small Lipopolypeptides
Is palmitoyl pentapeptide a new skin rejuvenation compound? It is a relatively small molecule:
an ester between palmitic acid and a pentapeptide chain to enhance oil solubility for the sake
of better skin penetration. The typical sequence of one of these pentapeptides is Lys-Thr-Thr-
Lys-Ser, a sequence, which mimics the specific sequence of a domain in procollagen type I (Pal-
KTTKS) or Matrixyl1 (60–62). In vitro studies have shown that the addition of Pal-KTTKS
stimulates the synthesis of key constituents of the skin matrix: collagen, elastin, and GAGs. In
vivo studies with the topical use of the lipo-mimetic pentapeptides are currently under way
and show an improvement of skin appearance (63,64).
Miscellanous Plant Extracts
When looking at the composition of most commercial antiaging formulations, one always notices
the use of plant ingredients. Table 1 gives an overview of the plant extracts mostly used. The
rationale of antiaging efficacy of these plant extracts is mainly based on folk medicine, general
anecdotic or subjective information, and much less on sound clinical published studies concerning
double-blind, vehicle-controlled antiaging treatments over long periods.
A Stretch-Mark Cream Which Was Used as an Antiwrinkle Cream
The last marketing furor in Europe and United States was regarding an antiaging product, a
commercial product named Strivectin-SD1 (65), a rather surprising story. As claimed by the
company in their adverisement, originally the product was developed as a cream for treating
stretch marks on abdomen and legs. This body cream contains many ingredients, including a
patented Striadil Complex1 (plant extracts such as Phyllantus emblica, Siegesbeckia orientalis,
and others) and the patented antiaging lipo-pentapeptide. Preliminary clinical trials with
Strivectin-SD showed that the product was able to reduce the appearance of existing stretch
marks. Then it appeared that the product could also be used on the face for treating
photoaging. So far, the scant clinical data are encouraging (61). The major question remains: Is
there a sound scientific basis under the HYPE? How does this new antiaging cream exactly
work? Besides the lipo-pentapeptide derivative, which are the other possible “active plant
ingredients”? The formulation contains 24 different plant ingredients. Further clinical
antiaging studies with these peptide-containing formulations and plant extracts are necessary
in the future before these efficacy claims can be confirmed. At this stage, only preliminary
antiaging testing results of this new cream were presented (6).
ORAL ANTIAGING COSMETICS
The term “oral cosmetics” is used with respect to dietary supplements, which claim to have
beneficial physiological effect on skin, hair, or nails; these are preparations for oral use only
such as capsules, tablets, liquids, or granulates. Oral cosmetics are mainly focused on antiaging
and slimming/anticellulite preparations. Clearly, the oral route of admnistration requires
special product characterizations such as toxicology, bioavailability, and the metabolization of
its components. Furthermore, these clinical trials should be randomized, placebo controlled
and double blind to minimize the bias of the results of the studies. In addition, any change in
dietary habits or lifestyle should be avoided, and the intake of other food supplements should
be kept under control during the complete study. An overview of the most recent antiaging
oral cosmetics available and their results is given in the chapter “Oral Cosmetics” by
Demeester et al. (11).
Table 1
List of the Plant Extracts Mostly Used in Commercial Antiaging Cosmetics
Sesamum indicum, Prunus Amygdalis dulcis, Phyllanthus umblica, Siegesbeckia orientalis, Theobroma cacao,
Bytospermum parkii, Mangifera indica, Mentha piperada, Aleurits moluccana, Glycurrhiza glabra, Arcostaphylos
uva, Imperata cylindrica, Centella asiatica, Echinacea purpurea, Camelia sinensis, Thea sinensis, Hordeum
vulgare, Crithium maritimum, Plantago lanceolata, Phellodendron amurense, Spirea ulmaria, Artemisia vulgaris,
Santalum album, Rosmarinus officinalis, Centella asiatica, Curcuma longa, Aloe vera, Arnica calendula, Ginkgo
biloba, various algae such as Fucus vesiculosus, Laminaria flexicaulis, Ascophyllum nodosum.
New Trends in Antiaging Cosmetic Ingredients and Treatments
297

=== Page 315 ===
CONCLUSIONS
The importance of antiaging cosmetics is actually well established. Many molecules are
promising “active” ingredients to slow down the different symptoms of photoaging. Even
though a growing amount of scientific literature deals with clinical antiaging studies, there is
still a need of further investigation to demonstrate the efficacy of these various ingredients in
topical formulations.
However, a sound approach of antiaging strategy is a lifestyle, which does not have any
marketing appeal but is probably effective. It consists of a healthy balanced diet, regular
physical exercise, avoidance of smoking and excessive alcohol, a good basic day and night skin
care treatment, use of sunscreens with high SPF during the day, maximal sun avoidance,
particularly for those with a light complexion (phototypes I and II) and those with an outdoor
lifestyle (35). The synergy of combining the topical use of antiaging creams with oral food
supplements appears to be an interesting approach in the future.
REFERENCES
1. Gilchrest BA. A review of skin aging and its medical therapy. Br J Dermatol 1996; 135:867–875.
2. Baran R, Maibach HI, eds. Texbook of Cosmetic Dermatology, 3rd ed., New York: Informa Healthcare,
2004.
3. Ramos-E-silva M, Da Silva Carneiro SC. Elderly skin and its rejuvenation: products and procedures
for the aged skin. J Cosmet Dermatol 2007; 6:40–50.
4. Farage MA, Miller KW, Elsner P, et al. Intrinsic and extrinsic factors in skin ageing: a review. Int J
Cosmet Sci 2008; 30:87–95.
5. Patravale VB, Mandawgade SD. A novel cosmetic delivery system: an application update. Int J
Cosmet Sci 2008; 30:19–33.
6. Sachs DL, Helfrich YR, Voorhees JH. Reversing the signs of aging. The search for topical agents a
“fountain of youth” effect continues. Advances for healthy aging, 2008. Available at: www.healthy-
aging.com.
7. Declercq L, Corstjens H, Maes D. Glycation end products. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds.
Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
8. Couturaud V. Biophysical characteristics of the skin relation to race, sex, age and site. In: Barel AO,
Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology. 3rd ed. New York:
Informa, 2009.
9. Bosset S, Bonnet-Duquennoy M, Barre´ P, et al. Photoageing shows histological features of chronic skin
inflammation without clinical and molecular abnormalities. Br J Dermatol 2003; 149:826–835.
10. Trautinger F. Photodamage of the skin. Photochem Photobiol Sci 2006; 5:158–159.
11. Demeester N, Barel AO, Vanden Berghe D, et al. Oral Cosmetics. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI,
eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Techonology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
12. Leow YH, Maibach HI. Cigarette smoking, cutaneous vasculature and tissue oxygen. Clin Dermatol
1998; 16:579–584.
13. Fujimura T, Haketa K, Hotta M, et al. Global and systematic demonstration for the practical usage of a
direct in vivo measurement system to evaluate wrinkle. Int J Cosmet Sci 2007; 6:423–436.
14. Jaspers S, Hopermann H, Sauermann G, et al. Rapid in vivo measurements of the topography
of human skin by active image triangulation using a micromirror device. Skin Res Technol 1999;
5: 195–207.
15. Visoscan VC981 and SELS1 [package insert]. Cologne, Germany: Courage-Khazaka Electronic
GmBH; 2008.
16. Intuiskin1 [package insert]. Crolles, France: Memscap, 2008. Available at: www.intuiskin.com.
17. Reviscometer1 [package insert]. Cologne, Germany: Courage-Khazaka Electronic GmBH; 2008.
18. Paye M, Mac-Mary S, Elkhyat A, et al. Use of the Reviscometer for measuring cosmetics-induced skin
surface effects. Skin Res Technol 2007; 13:343–349.
19. Cutometer1 [package insert]. Cologne, Germany: Courage-Khazaka Electronic GmBH; 2008.
20. Querleux B, Le´veˆque J-L, de Rigal J. In Vivo cross-sectional ultrasonic imaging of human skin. Clin
Lab Invest Dermatol 1988; 177:332–337.
21. Gniadecka M Gniadecka R, Serup J, et al. Ultrasound structure and digital image analysis of the
subepidermal low echogenic band in aged human skin: diurnal changes and interindividual
variability. J Invest Dermatol 1994; 102:362–365.
22. Gniadecka M, Jemec GBE. Quantitative evaluation of chronological and photoageing in vivo: studies
on skin echogenecity and thickness. Br J Dermatol 1998; 139:815–821.
298
Clarys and Barel

=== Page 316 ===
23. Sandby-Mo¨ller J, Wulf HC. Ultrasonic subepidermal low-chogenic band dependence of age and body
site. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:57–63.
24. Gabard B, Clarys P, Barel AO. Comparison of commercial electrical measurement instruments for
assessing the hydration state of the Stratum Corneum. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds.
Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
25. Lucassen JAJ, Van Geen GNA, Jansen JAS. Fourier-transformed (FT) infrared spectroscopy of the skin
using an attenuated total reflection (ATR) unit. J Biomed Optics 1998; 3:267–280.
26. Van Der Pol A, Caspers PJ. Confocal Raman Spectroscopy for in vivo skin hydration measurements.
In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology. 3rd ed. New
York: Informa, 2009:151–164.
27. Dermalab1 [package insert]. Hadsund, Denmark: Cortex Technology; 2008.
28. Skicon1 [package insert]. Hamamatsu, Japan: IBS Co.; 2008.
29. Dermal Phase Meter1 [package insert]. Portsmouth New Hampshire, U.S.A.: Nova Technology; 2008.
30. Corneometer1 [package insert]. Cologne: Germany: Courage-Khazaka Electronic GmBH; 2008.
31. MoistureMeter1 [package insert]. Kuopio, Finland: Delphin Technologies Ltd.; 2008.
32. Schwartz et al. Cosmeceuticals 2007. Available at: www.emedicine.com.
33. Cosmeceutical. Wikipedia. Available at: Wikipedia.org/wiki/cosmeceutical, 2008.
34. Andersen KE. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and
Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
35. Lubeck RF, Berneburg M, Trelles M, et al. How best to halt and /or revert UV-induced skin ageing:
strategies, fact and fiction. Exp Dermatol, 2008; 17:228–229.
36. Loden M. Hydrating Substances. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic
Science and Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
37. Schmid D, Belser E, Liechti C, et al. Skin rejuvenation with a Biomimetic Peptide designed to promote
desquamation. SO¨ FW–J 2006; 132:2–6.
38. Lu¨beck RP, Kaya G, Saurat H. Commentary 1. Exp Dermatol 2008; 17:235–236.
39. Van Reeth I. Silicones: a key ingreduent in cosmetic and toiletry. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI,
eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
40. Zocchi G. Skin feel agents. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and
Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
41. Kligman AM. The treatment of photoaged human skin by topical tretinoin. Drugs 1989; 38:1–8.
42. Mordon S, Lagarde JM, Vienne MP, et al. Ultrasound imaging demonstration of the improvement of
non-ablative laser remodeling by concomitant daily topical application of 0.05% retinaldehyde.
J Cosmet Laser Ther 2004; 6:5–9.
43. Bertin C, Robert M, Jousselin M, et al. Treating wrinkles with Dimethylaminoethanol, Retinol and
Mineral salts. Cosmet Toiletries 2008:75.
44. Watson REB, Long SP, Bowden JJ, et al. Repair of photoaged dermal matrix by topical application of a
cosmetic ‘antiageing’ product. Br J Dermatol 2008; 158:472–477.
45. Rawlings AV, Davis A, Carlomusto M, et al. Effect of lactic acid isomers on keratocyte ceramide
synthesis, stratum corneum lipid levels and barrier function. Arch Dermatol Res 1996; 288:383–390.
46. Berardesca E, Distante F, Vignoli GP, et al. Alpha-hydroxy acids modulate stratum corneum barrier
function. Br J Dermatol 1997; 137:934–938.
47. Saint-Le´ger D, Le´veˆque J-L, Verschoore M. The use of hydroxy acids on the skin: characteristics of C8-
lipohydroxy acid. J Cosmet Dermatol 2007; 6:59–65.
48. Weber SV, Lodge JK, Saliou C, et al. Antioxidants. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook
of Cosmetic Science and Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
49. Traikovich SS. Use of topical ascorbic acid and its effects on photodamaged skin topography. Arch
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999; 125:1091–1098.
50. Humbert PG, Haflek M, Creidi P, et al. Topical ascorbic acid on photoaged skin. Clinical
topographical and ultrastuctural evaluation: double blind study vs. placebo. Exp Dermatol 2003;
12:237–244.
51. Darr D, Dunston S, Faust H, et al. Effectiveness of antioxidants (vitamin C and E) with and without
sunscreen as topical photoprotectants. Acta Derm Venereol 1996; 76:264–268.
52. Trevithick JR, Shum DT, Redae S, et al. Reduction of sunburn damage to skin by topical application of
vitamin E acetate following exposure to UVB radiation: effect of delaying application or of reding
concentration of vitamin E acetate applied. Scanning Microsc 1993; 7:1269–1281.
53. Hoppe U, Bergemann J, Diembeck W, et al. Coenzyme Q10, acutaneous antioxidant and energizer.
Biofactors 1999; 9:371–378.
54. Breitner H. Randomized, placebo-controlled, double blind study on the clinical efficacy of a cream
containing 5% alpha-lipoic acid related to photoageing of facial skin. Br J Dermatol 2003; 149:841–849.
55. Draelos ZD. The latest cosmeceutical approaches for anti-ageing. J Cosmet Dermatol 2007; 6:2–6.
56. Knott A, Koop U, Mielke H, et al. A novel treatment option for photoaged skin. J Cosmet Dermatol
2008; 7:15–22
New Trends in Antiaging Cosmetic Ingredients and Treatments
299

=== Page 317 ===
57. Baxter R. Anti-aging properties of resveratol: review and report of a potent new antioxidant skin care
formulation. J Cosmet Dermatol 2008; 7:2–7.
58. Wallo W, Nebus J, Leyden JJ. Efficacy of a soy moisturizer in photyoageing: a double-blind, vehicle-
controlled, 12 weeks study. J Drugs Dermatol 2007; 6:917–922.
59. Chiu AE, Chan JL, Kern DG, et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of green tea extracts in the
clinicaland histological appearance of photageing skin. Dermatol Surg 2005; 31:855–860.
60. Matricyl1. A patented ingredient from Sederma1. Available at: www.Sederma.com 2008.
61. Palmitoyl pentapeptide-4 (Matrixyl), a gentler wrinkle cure candidate. Available at:
www.smartskincare.com/treatments/topical/pentapeptide.html. 2008.
62. Epinions.com. Available at: www.epinions.com. 2008.
63. Litner K, Peschard O. Biologically active peptides: from laboratory curiosity to functional skin care
product. Int J Cosmet Sci 2000; 22:207–218.
64. Robinson LR, Fitegerakd NC, Doughty DG, et al. Topical palmitoyl pentapeptide provides
improvement in photoaged human facial skin. Int J Cosmet Sci 2005; 27:155–160.
65. Strivectin–SDR [package insert]. Salt Lake City, U.S.A.: a patented topical preparation from
Klein-Becker, 2008.
300
Clarys and Barel

=== Page 318 ===
28
Antioxidants
Stefan U. Weber
Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany
John K. Lodge
University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K.
Claude Saliou
Johnson & Johnson Asia Pacific, A Division of Johnson & Johnson Pte. Ltd., Singapore
Lester Packer
Pharmacology & Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
In the field of dermatology, antioxidants are a widely used and innovative ingredient in topical
applications. This chapter is intended to provide an overview of the current state of research
on the use of antioxidants in cosmeceutical applications as well as safety aspects. The most
important antioxidants, vitamin E, vitamin C, thiols, and flavonoids, will be introduced and
their intriguing cooperation, as well as their role in signal transduction events, will be
discussed.
The body is continuously exposed to oxidants. Endogenous sources arise as a
consequence of normal metabolic pathways. For example, mitochondrial respiration produces
superoxide and hydrogen peroxide, while enzymes such as lipoxygenase, xanthine oxidase,
and NADPH oxidase produce hydroperoxides and superoxide. Exogenous oxidants arise from
environmental pollutants such as smoke, smog, UV radiation, and diet. In response to these
oxidants, a number of systemic antioxidants are available whose function is to scavenge
reactive oxygen species, preventing damage to macromolecules such as lipids, DNA, and
proteins. Antioxidant protection arises from molecules synthesized as part of metabolism, e.g.,
glutathione (GSH) and uric acid; essential vitamins, which must be taken in from the diet, e.g.,
vitamin E and C; and enzymes, which decompose reactive oxygen species, e.g., superoxide
dismutase, catalase, and GSH peroxidases. These systems provide protection in various intra-
and intercellular compartments. Usually there is a tight balance between oxidants produced
and antioxidant scavenging; however, under certain conditions, the balance can be tipped in
favor of the oxidants, a condition called “oxidative stress.” Potentially oxidative stress can be
caused by an increase in the number of oxidants, for example, as a result of cigarette smoking
or UV irradiation, or by a deficiency of any one important antioxidant. This is of major concern
since oxidative stress has been implicated in a number of conditions including atherosclerosis,
skin cancer, and photoaging.
VITAMIN E
Vitamin E is the major lipophilic antioxidant in skin, and it is the most commonly used natural
antioxidant in topical formulations. It is found in all parts of the skin, the dermis and
epidermis as well as in the stratum corneum (SC), and is believed to play an essential role in
the protection of biomolecules from oxidative stress.
Vitamin E is a family of eight naturally occurring isoforms: four tocopherols (a-,b-,g-,d-
form) and four tocotrienols (a-,b-,g-,d-form) (1) (Fig. 1). All forms consist of a chromanol
nucleus that carries the redox-active phenolic hydroxyl group and a lipophilic tail. While
tocopherols contain a phytyl side chain, the isoprenoid tail of the tocotrienols is polyunsat-
urated, making the chain more rigid. The side chain is anchored in lipid membranes while the
nucleus is located at the lipid/aqueous interface. Even though the radical scavenging activity

=== Page 319 ===
of the different isoforms is essentially identical, their biological activity after oral administration
differs dramatically (1). This phenomenon can be explained by the existence of an a-tocopherol
transfer protein in the liver that positively selects RRR-a-tocopherol and incorporates it into
VLDL, which leads to recirculation of the a-tocopherol pool, while this transfer protein does not
recognize the other forms, which are therefore excreted more rapidly (2).
In skin, as in the other human organs, a-tocopherol is the predominant form of vitamin E
with 5 to 10 higher concentrations than g-tocopherol. Delivery of vitamin E to the SC occurs in
two different modes. On the one hand, it is stored into differentiating keratinocytes and moves
up into the newly formed SC, which leads to a gradient-type distribution of a-tocopherol with
decreasing concentrations toward the skin surface (3). On the other hand, vitamin E is secreted
by sebaceous glands and reaches the SC from the outside. In sebaceous gland-rich regions such
as the face, this delivery mechanism is responsible for the enrichment of the outer SC with
vitamin E (4). Sebaceous gland activity is low in children and starts to increase during puberty
to reach a plateau at the age of 19 and remains relatively constant until it starts to decline in
women starting in the cohort of 50 to 59 years of age and in men starting from 70 years of age.
(5). Thus, children as well as women older than 50 years and men older than 70 years may have
a compromised mechanism of vitamin E delivery to the skin surface. These collectives may
potentially benefit from topical vitamin E supplementation.
After oral supplementation, vitamin E reaches the skin via sebaceous glands after a
period of at least two to three weeks (6). These findings demonstrate that the sebaceous gland
route is a significant delivery mechanism for vitamin E.
Various oxidative stressors have been shown to deplete vitamin E, among other
antioxidants. In the epidermis, at least four minimal erythemal doses (MEDs) of solar-
simulated ultraviolet (ssUV) radiation are needed to deplete vitamin E (7), while doses as low
as 0.75 MED are capable of destroying vitamin E in the human SC (3). Mouse experiments have
shown that a dose of 1 ppm  2 hr of ozone (O3) depletes SC vitamin E (8). Since this
concentration of O3 is higher than the naturally occurring levels of tropospheric O3, the
biological relevance of these findings for human skin is not yet clear. Benzoyl peroxide is used
for the treatment of acne. A single application of a 10% w/vol formulation of benzoyl peroxide
almost completely depletes SC vitamin E in vivo (9).
a-Tocopherol is widely used as an active ingredient in topical formulations. After topical
application, it penetrates readily into the skin (10). Since the free form of vitamin E is quite
unstable and light sensitive (it absorbs in the UVB range), the active hydroxyl group is usually
protected by esterification with acetate. This increases the stability but renders the compound
redox inactive. When administered orally, vitamin E acetate is hydrolyzed quantitatively in the
intestines. There is some controversy, however, as to whether a-tocopherol acetate can be
hydrolyzed in human skin. Chronic application of a-tocopherol acetate leads to an increase in
free vitamin E in both the rat (11) and the mouse (12), where it was recently shown that UVB
increases the hydrolysis of a-tocopherol acetate by induction of nonspecific esterases up to
10- to 30-fold (13). While one study suggested that bioconversion of a-tocopherol acetate does
not occur in human skin (14), significant hydrolysis was demonstrated in recent studies using a
human epidermis-tissue culture model and in vivo (15). A 0.15% formulation of vitamin E
acetate increased the SC far more than oral supplementation with 400-IU a-tocopherol (16).
A rinse-off application of vitamin E was also able to increase the vitamin E.
The availability of the free form of vitamin E needs to be considered when analyzing
possible health benefits. The majority of studies have been carried out in animal models, while
Figure 1
Naturally occurring forms of vitamin E.
(A) Tocopherols contain a saturated side chain,
(B) while the isoprenoid side chain of tocotrienols
is polyunsaturated. The a-forms contain both
methyl groups on the chromanol nucleus (1,2),
while the b-forms contain only methyl group (1),
the g-forms only (2), and the d-forms none.
302
Weber et al.

=== Page 320 ===
only limited data exist for human studies. Lipid peroxidation is inhibited after topical
application of a-tocopherol (17). Several studies indicate that topically applied a-tocopherol
inhibits UVB-induced photodamage of DNA in a mouse model (18) and keratinocyte cultures
(Trolox1, water-soluble derivative of vitamin E) (19). Protection against Langerhans cell depletion
by UV light was observed after topical application of a-tocopherol in a mouse model (20).
a-Tocopherol and its sorbate ester were studied in a mouse model of skin aging. Both antioxidants
were found to be effective, sorbate even more so than a-tocopherol (21). Systemic administration
of vitamin E in humans (only in combination with vitamin C) increased the MED and reduced
changes in skin blood flow after UV irradiation (22,23). A rinse-off application of vitamin E was
able to increase the vitamin E content in the barrier lipids. It was also able to decrease the
formation of squalene monohydroperoxide from squalene by low-dose UVA (8 J/cm2 (24).
Yet, several studies indicate that a-tocopherol acetate is not as effective as free vitamin E
when applied topically. Inhibition of DNA mutation in mice was 5 to 10 times less effective
(19). Also, in a mouse model, unlike free vitamin E, the acetate form seemed to be ineffective
(25). In summary, even though some health benefits of vitamin E supplementation have been
shown, there is still a need for controlled studies in humans under physiological conditions. So
far vitamin E was found to have anticarcinogenic, photoprotective, skin-stabilizing properties.
This topic is reviewed in detail by Thiele et al. (26).
The safety of vitamin E supplementation is a topic of current discourse. For years, oral
application of vitamin E has been regarded harmless. Recent meta-analyses discuss an increase
in overall mortality after oral vitamin E supplementation. However, another large meta-
analysis found no overall increase in cancer mortality by vitamin E (27). In the framework of
the SUVIMAX study, a recent publication suggests increased risk of skin cancer in women
taking a mixture of vitamin E, vitamin C, b-carotene, selenium, and zinc, but not in men (28). A
panel of experts concluded from clinical trial evidence that vitamin E supplements appear safe
for most adults in amounts  1600 IU (1073 mg RRR-a-tocopherol or the molar equivalent of its
esters (29). Safety data were obtained for oral supplementation. No large controlled studies
exist for topical supplementation of vitamin E.
Recently, the tocotrienol forms of vitamin E have become a focus of interest, since they
have been found to be more efficient antioxidants in some model systems than tocopherols
(30). Even if they are not bioavailable after oral supplementation, topical application
circumvents the exclusion by a-TTP in the liver. In fact, free tocotrienols readily penetrate
into mouse skin (10), and tocotrienol acetate is hydrolyzed in skin homogenates and in murine
skin in vivo (24). Topical application of a tocotrienol-rich fraction has been demonstrated to
protect mouse skin from UV- and O3-induced oxidative stress (31,32).
Benzoyl peroxide (BPO) is used for the treatment of acne. During seven daily applications
of a 10% w/vol formulation of benzoyl peroxide, endogenous SC vitamin E was progressively
depleted. Vitamin E in the SC was significantly retained after a-tocotrienol (5% w/vol)
supplementation for seven days. a-Tocotrienol supplementation significantly mitigated the
BPO-induced lipid peroxidation. The transepidermal water loss was increased 1.9-fold by
seven BPO applications, while there was no difference between a-tocotrienol treatment and
controls (9). In conclusion, tocotrienols bear a potential that yet remains to be explored.
VITAMIN C
Ascorbic acid or vitamin C is one of the most important water-soluble antioxidants, which is
present in high amounts in the skin. While most species are able to produce ascorbic acid,
humans lack the enzymes necessary for its synthesis. Deficiency in ascorbic acid causes scurvy,
a disease already described in the ancient writings of the Greeks (33). Apart from the pure
antioxidant function ascorbic acid is an essential cofactor for different enzymes. The antioxidant
capacity of vitamin C is related to its unique structure (Fig. 2). Due to its pKa1 of 4.25, it is
Figure 2
Structural formula of vitamin C as the mono-anion ascorbate.
Antioxidants
303

=== Page 321 ===
present as a monoanion at physiological pH, which can undergo a one-electron donation to
form the ascorbyl radical with a delocalized electron and can be further oxidized to result in
dehydroascorbic acid. Dehydroascorbic acid is relatively unstable and breaks down if it is
not regenerated (see antioxidant network). In vitro ascorbic acid can scavenge many types of
radicals, including the hydroxyl (OH.), the superoxide (O2
.), and water-soluble peroxyl
(ROO.) radicals as well as other reactive oxygen species such as O3, and quenches singlet
O2. Because of its relative reduction potentials, ascorbate can reduce Fe(III) to Fe(II), which
in turn can decompose hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) to the dangerous hydroxyl radical.
Therefore, vitamin C can exert pro-oxidant effects in the presence of unbound iron (Fenton’s
reagent).
In the skin, vitamin C is found in all layers. In SC, it forms a similar gradient as vitamin E
with decreasing concentrations toward the outside. Vitamin C is depleted by O3, UV radiation,
and BPO. One of the earliest discoveries of vitamin C benefits in the skin was the observation
that it stimulates collagen synthesis in dermal fibroblasts (34). Recently, a pretranscriptional
role of vitamin C has been described (35). Also, vitamin C is essential in the formation of
competent barrier lipids in reconstructed human epidermis (36).
Several studies have investigated protective effects of vitamin C against oxidative stress.
UVB-induced immunotolerance as a marker of damage to the immune system could be
abrogated by topical application of vitamin C to murine skin (37). UVB-induced sunburn cell
formation was mitigated by vitamin C in porcine skin (38). While one study reported a
postadministrative protective effect of vitamin C-phosphate against UV-induced damage in
mice (39), another study found no such effect in humans (40). Systemic application of vitamin C
in combination with vitamin E protected against UV-induced erythema in humans (22).
Another study described protection against erythema, sunburn cell formation, and thymidine
dimer formation in pigs by a combination of vitamin E (1%) and vitamin C (15%) (41). In a
keratinocyte cell culture system, vitamin C reduced UVB-induced DNA damage (19). In mice, an
anticarcinogenic effect of vitamin C was described (42). However, no data regarding such
benefits exist in humans.
Since vitamin C is not very stable, it is difficult to incorporate it into topical formulations.
Esterification with phosphate is used to circumvent this limitation. In vitro experiments
demonstrated that Mg-ascorbyl-2-phosphate penetrates the murine skin barrier and is
bioconverted into free ascorbate (43).
THIOL ANTIOXIDANTS
Thiols share an oxidizable sulfydryl (SH) group. Glutathione (GSH) is a tripeptide (Fig. 3)
whose SH group at the cysteine can be oxidized, forming a disulfide (GSSG) with another
GSH. Physiologically, more than 90% of the GSH is in the reduced form. GSH peroxidases use
GSH oxidation to reduce H2O2 and other water-soluble peroxides. The synthesis of GSH by the
human cell is stimulated by N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), which is hydrolyzed to cysteine
intracellularly. Moreover, NAC acts as an antioxidant itself. Lipoic acid (1,2-dithiolane-3-
pentanoic acid or thioctic acid, LA) is a cofactor of multienzyme complexes in the
decarboxylation of a-keto acids. Applied as the oxidized dithiol dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA)
it is taken up by cells and reduced by mitochondrial and cytosolic enzymes [NAD(P)H
dependent]. It thereby forms an efficient cycle, since it can in turn regenerate GSSG to GSH and
stimulate the GSH synthesis by improving cysteine utilization (44).
Figure 3
Chemical structures of thiols: (A) GSH con-
sisting of glycine, cysteine, and glutamic acid. (B) Lipoic
acid in its oxidized form as a disulfide.
304
Weber et al.

=== Page 322 ===
General provisos in the use of thiols in skin applications are the typical smell and the
poor solubility of LA in aqueous solutions below pH 7. Yet, several thiol agents have been
tested for protective effects in the skin. For oral as well as topical application in mouse models,
GSH-ethyl esters and GSH-isopropyl esters proved to be more efficient than free GSH. Oral
supplementation decreased the formation of UV-induced tumors (43) and the formation of
sunburn cells (45). Topical treatment partially inhibited UV-induced immunosuppression (46).
NAC was able to reduce UVA-induced DNA damage in fibroblasts (47) and protected mice
against UVB-induced immunosuppression after topical application (46) in a mode that did not
involve de novo GSH synthesis (48). Lipoic acid was demonstrated to penetrate into mouse
skin (49), while oral supplementation of lipoic acid has actually been shown to have an anti-
inflammatory effect in mice (50) and to prevent symptoms of vitamin E deficiency in vitamin
E-deficient mice (51).
POLYPHENOLS
Flavonoids are widely distributed plant pigments and tannins occurring in barks, roots, leaves,
flowers, and fruits. Their roles in plants include photoprotection and contributing to the plant
color. Consequently, our diet contains flavonoids, which can be found in a variety of foods
from green vegetables to red wine.
In spite of the fact flavonoids have been used in traditional medicine for several
centuries, it was not until 1936 that their first biological activity, the vitamin C-sparing action,
was described by Rusznyak and Szent–Gyo¨rgyi. As a result, they received the name of
“Vitamin P.” Flavonoids, also referred to as “plant polyphenols,” have been recognized as
potent antioxidants. Their free radical-scavenging and metal-chelating activities have been
extensively studied. Nonetheless, given their polyphenolic structure (Fig. 4), the electron- and
hydrogen-donating abilities constitute the major feature of their antioxidant properties (52). By
opposition to the antioxidants previously described, flavonoids are not part of the endogenous
antioxidant system but still interact with it through the antioxidant network (see below).
Among the applications found in traditional medicine, flavonoids account for anti-
inflammatory, antiphlogistic, and wound-healing functions. Their effect on skin inflammation
has been thought for a long time to be limited to the inhibition of the activity of 5-lipoxygenase
and cyclooxygenase. However, recent studies suggest a more subtle mode of regulation of the
inflammatory reaction by flavonoids. In fact, flavonoids such as silymarin, quercetin, genistein,
and apigenin are effective inhibitors of NF-kB, a proinflammatory transcription factor, thereby
reducing the transcription of proinflammatory genes and preventing inflammation (53–55).
Oral supplementation and topical application of green and black tea polyphenols show
beneficial effects against UV radiation (UVR)-induced skin carcinogenesis in mice (56–58). In
addition, these flavonoids as well as silymarin were found to prevent UVR-induced
inflammation, ornithine decarboxylase expression, and activity (59), all of these events being
potential contributors to carcinogenesis (60).
Procyanidins, also named “condensed tannins” are flavonoids found in pine bark
(Pycnogenol1), grape seeds, and fruits, for instance. By direct protein interaction, they were
shown to protect collagen and elastin, two dermal matrix proteins, against their degradation
(61). Furthermore, some of these procyanidins exhibit a remarkable effect on follicle hair
proliferation (62), thus extending the therapeutic applications of flavonoids to alopecia.
Although the flavonoids are not part of our endogenous antioxidant defenses, they display a
broad spectrum of properties particularly helpful in preventing UVR-caused deleterious
effects in human skin.
Figure 4
Chemical structure of catechin, a flavane, as an example of a
flavonoid. Flavanes share a common base structure (rings A, B, C, one),
which is hydroxylated in different patterns.
Antioxidants
305

=== Page 323 ===
THE ANTIOXIDANT NETWORK
When antioxidants react with an oxidant, they are converted to a form that no longer functions
as an antioxidant and is said to be consumed. In order for the oxidized product to function
again, it needs to be recycled to its native form. The antioxidant network describes the ability of
the antioxidants to recycle and regenerate oxidized forms of each other, thereby providing
extra levels of protection (Fig. 5). Thus, the process is synergistic, and the net antioxidant
protection is always greater than the sum of the individual effects.
The major systemic antioxidants vitamin E, vitamin C, and GSH are present in different
cellular compartments, and all have the ability to interact with one another. Typically the
radicals formed on the antioxidants are more stable and longer lived than the damaging
radicals produced in vivo, which is mostly due to a delocalization of the unpaired electron.
Thus, they have more chance to interact with each other and be reduced than to react with
macromolecules. Vitamin E is the major chain-breaking antioxidant, protecting biological
membranes from lipid peroxidation, which is a difficult task considering the ratio of
phospholipids molecules to vitamin E is ~1500:1. However, vitamin E is never depleted
because it is constantly being recycled. When vitamin E becomes oxidized, a radical on vitamin E
is formed (chromanoxyl radical). In the absence of networking antioxidants, this radical can
either become pro-oxidant by abstracting hydrogen from lipids or react to form nonradical
products (consumed). However, a number of antioxidants are known to be able to reduce the
chromanoxyl radical and regenerate vitamin E (63). These include vitamin C (64), ubiquinol,
and GSH (65). Vitamin C, the most abundant plasma antioxidant and first line of defense, can
reduce the tocopheroxyl radical, forming the ascorbyl radical. Interactions between vitamins E
and C have been demonstrated in various systems both in vivo [reviewed in (66)] and in vitro
[reviewed in (67)]. The ascorbyl radical is practically inert and oxidizes further to form
dehydroascorbic acid. This can be reduced back to native vitamin C by GSH. This process is
known to occur both chemically (68) and enzymatically (69) in both erythrocytes (70) and
neutrophils induced by bacteria (71); the latter may relate to a host of defense mechanisms.
Glutathione is the major intracellular antioxidant. Oxidized GSSG is constantly recycled to
GSH enzymatically by GSH reductase, thus providing a constant pool of GSH. Glutathione
recycling relies on NAD(P)H as the electron donor. Thus, metabolic pathways involved in
energy production provide the ultimate electron donors for the antioxidant network. It is also
known that GSH can directly recycle vitamin E (65,72), as well as ubiquinol (73), another
lipophilic antioxidant which itself is recycled in mitochondria as part of the electron
transport chain.
Certain supplements are also known to contribute to the network by recycling
antioxidants. Lipoic acid is a prime example since this potent antioxidant can recycle
ascorbate, GSH, and ubiquinol in vitro [reviewed in (74)]. Recently, it has been demonstrated
that flavonoids may also play a networking role since they are also able to recycle the
ascorbyl radical (75). Thus, there exists a very organized defense system against free radical
attack, which ultimately serves to protect and recycle antioxidants in various cellular
compartments.
Figure 5
Schematics of the inter-
twined action of the antioxidant net-
work. An ascorbate molecule can either
recycle the vitamin E radical arising
from breaking the lipid peroxidation
chain or scavenge an aqueous radical.
Glutathione can either regenerate
ascorbate or scavenge a radical enzy-
matically. Glutathione itself then can be
regenerated by the cellular metabolism.
306
Weber et al.

=== Page 324 ===
REGULATION OF GENE TRANSCRIPTION
The skin is the largest human organ permanently exposed to a variety of stresses, among
which oxidative insults such as UVR and ozone exposure account for the etiology of many
skin disorders. However, oxidative damage is not responsible for all biological effects
engendered by these stressors in the skin. Indeed, UVR causes changes in the expression of
genes encoding proinflammatory cytokines, growth factors, stress response proteins,
oncoproteins, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), etc. (76). Although the immediate target(s)
of UVR is (are) still unknown, certain kinases and transcription factors can be activated by UVR,
thereby increasing gene transcription (77). One transcription factor, NF-kB, appears of particular
interest for the skin, since the lack of its inhibitory protein, IkBa, is associated with the
development of a widespread dermatitis in knockout mice (78,79). Furthermore, reactive oxygen
species, such as the ones produced after UVR, are suspected to play an important role in the
activation of NF-kB (80). Consequently, antioxidants have been found to be among the most
potent NF-kB inhibitors.
Vitamin E has specific effects on signaling events: Tocotrienols downregulate the
3-hydroxyl-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase, a key enzyme of the
mevalonate pathway that produces cholesterol (81). Inhibition of side-pathways of HMG-
CoA-reductase is known to have shown anticarcinogenic effects. a-Tocopherol is able to inhibit
protein kinase C, an important factor of atherosclerosis (82). Protein kinase C also regulates the
activity of collagenase (MMP-1), an enzyme that degrades skin collagen. In cell culture models,
a-tocopherol inhibits MMP-1 via inhibition of protein kinase C(83). Recently, it was
demonstrated that vitamin E inhibited the UV-induced expression of metalloelastase and
thus may inhibit the development of solar elastosis, the hallmark of sun-induced damage.
However, clinical studies are required to assess the effectiveness of these antioxidants,
including the flavonoid silymarin, a-lipoic acid, and the GSH precursor N-acetyl-L-cysteine, on
skin inflammatory disorders. Using high-throughput procedures such as the cDNA arrays for
instance (84), the evaluation of the antioxidants on the whole genome is henceforth possible.
These studies will only confirm the hypothesis that antioxidants are responsible for a much
broader action spectrum than their antioxidant functions per se and extend their role on more
subtle regulatory mechanisms of the gene expression.
PERSPECTIVES
The general role of antioxidants in the protection against oxidative stress is well established. In
skin applications, antioxidants are a promising tool to mitigate oxidative injury. Even though a
growing amount of literature deals with skin protection by antioxidants, there is still a need for
investigation. Especially, clinical human studies need to be carried out to demonstrate the
efficacy of antioxidants in topical formulations.
REFERENCES
1. Brigelius-Flohe R, Traber MG. Vitamin E.: function and metabolism. Faseb J 1999; 13:1145–1155.
2. Traber MG, Ramakrishnan R, Kayden HJ. Human plasma vitamin E kinetics demonstrate rapid
recycling of plasma RRR-a-tocopherol. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 1994; 91:10005–10008.
3. Thiele JJ, Traber MG, Packer L. Depletion of human stratum corneum vitamin E: an early and
sensitive in vivo marker of UV-induced photo-oxidation. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 110:756–761.
4. Thiele JJ, Weber SU, Packer L. Sebaceous gland secretion is a major physiologic route of vitamin E
delivery to skin. J Invest Dermatol 1999; 113:1006–1010.
5. Pochi PE, Strauss JS, Downing DT. Age-related changes in sebaceous gland activity. J Invest Dermatol
1979; 73:108–111.
6. Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S, Kraemer K, Thiele JJ. Oral supplementation with all-Rac- and RRR-a-
tocopherol increases vitamin E levels in human sebum after a latency period of 14–21 days. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2004; 1031:184–194.
7. Shindo Y, Witt E, Han D, et al. Dose-response effects of acute ultraviolet irradiation on antioxidants and
molecular markers of oxidation in murine epidermis and dermis. J Invest Dermatol 1994; 102:470–475.
Antioxidants
307

=== Page 325 ===
8. Thiele JJ, Traber MG, Polefka TG, et al. Ozone-exposure depletes vitamin E and induces lipid
peroxidation in murine stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol 1997; 108:753–757.
9. Weber SU, Thiele JJ, Han N, et al. Topical a-tocotrienol supplementation inhibits lipid peroxidation
but fails to mitigate increased transepidermal water loss after benzoyl peroxide treatment of human
skin. Free Radic Biol Med 2003; 34:170–176.
10. Traber MG, Rallis M, Podda M, et al. Penetration and distribution of a-tocopherol, a- or g-tocotrienols
applied individually onto murine skin. Lipids 1998; 33:87–91.
11. Norkus EP, Bryce GF, Bhagavan HN. Uptake and bioconversion of a-tocopheryl acetate to
a-tocopherol in skin of hairless mice. Photochem Photobiol 1993; 57:613–615.
12. Beijersbergen van Henegouwen GM, Junginger HE, de Vries H. Hydrolysis of RRR-a-tocopheryl
acetate (vitamin E acetate) in the skin and its UV protecting activity (an in vivo study with the rat).
J Photochem Photobiol B 1995; 29:45–51.
13. Kramer-Stickland K, Liebler DC. Effect of UVB on hydrolysis of a-tocopherol acetate to a-tocopherol
in mouse skin. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111:302–307.
14. Alberts DS, Goldman R, Xu MJ, et al. Disposition and metabolism of topically administered
a-tocopherol acetate: a common ingredient of commercially available sunscreens and cosmetics. Nutr
Cancer 1996; 26:193–201.
15. Nabi Z, Tavakkol A, Dobke M, et al. Bioconversion of vitamin E acetate in human skin. Curr Probl
Dermatol 2001; 29:175–186.
16. Tavakkol A, Nabi Z, Soliman N, et al. Delivery of vitamin E to the skin by a novel liquid skin cleanser:
comparison of topical versus oral supplementation. J Cosmet Sci 2004; 55:177–187.
17. Lopez-Torres M, Thiele JJ, Shindo Y, et al. Topical application of a-tocopherol modulates the
antioxidant network and diminishes ultraviolet-induced oxidative damage in murine skin. Br J
Dermatol 1998; 138:207–215.
18. McVean M, Liebler DC. Inhibition of UVB-induced DNA photodamage in mouse epidermis by
topically applied a-tocopherol. Carcinogenesis 1997; 18:1617–1622.
19. Stewart MS, Cameron GS, Pence BC. Antioxidant nutrients protect against UVB-induced oxidative
damage to DNA of mouse keratinocytes in culture. J Invest Dermatol 1996; 106:1086–1089.
20. Halliday GM, Bestak R, Yuen KS, et al. UVA-induced immunosuppression. Mutat Res 1998; 422:
139–145.
21. Jurkiewicz BA, Bissett DL, Buettner GR. Effect of topically applied tocopherol on ultraviolet radiation-
mediated free radical damage in skin. J Invest Dermatol 1995; 104:484–488.
22. Eberlein-Konig B, Placzek M, Przybilla B. Protective effect against sunburn of combined systemic
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and d-a-tocopherol (vitamin E). J Am Acad Dermatol 1998; 38:45–48.
23. Fuchs J, Kern H. Modulation of UV-light-induced skin inflammation by D-a-tocopherol and L-
ascorbic acid: a clinical study using solar simulated radiation. Free Radic Biol Med 1998; 25:1006–1012.
24. Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S, Tavakkol A, Polefka T, et al. Vitamin E delivery to human skin by a
rinse-off product: penetration of a-tocopherol versus wash-out effects of skin surface lipids. Skin
Pharmacol Physiol 2005; 18:20–26.
25. Yuen KS, Halliday GM. a-tocopherol, an inhibitor of epidermal lipid peroxidation, prevents ultraviolet
radiation from suppressing the skin immune system. Photochem Photobiol 1997; 65:587–592.
26. Thiele JJ, Hsieh SN, Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S. Vitamin E: critical review of its current use in
cosmetic and clinical dermatology. Dermatol Surg 2005; 31:805–813; discussion 813.
27. Bardia A, Tleyjeh IM, Cerhan JR, et al. Efficacy of antioxidant supplementation in reducing
primary cancer incidence and mortality: systematic review and meta-analysis. Mayo Clin Proc
2008; 83:23–34.
28. Hercberg S, Ezzedine K, Guinot C, et al. Antioxidant supplementation increases the risk of skin
cancers in women but not in men. J Nutr 2007; 137:2098–2105.
29. Hathcock JN, Azzi A, Blumberg J, et al. Vitamins E and C are safe across a broad range of intakes.
Am J Clin Nutr 2005; 81:736–745.
30. Serbinova EA, Packer L. Antioxidant properties of a-tocopherol and a-tocotrienol. Methods Enzymol
1994; 234:354–366.
31. Weber C, Podda M, Rallis M, et al. Efficacy of topically applied tocopherols and tocotrienols in
protection of murine skin from oxidative damage induced by UV-irradiation. Free Radic Biol Med
1997; 22:761–769.
32. Thiele JJ, Traber MG, Podda M, et al. Ozone depletes tocopherols and tocotrienols topically applied to
murine skin. FEBS Lett 1997; 401:167–170.
33. Sauberlich HE. Pharmacology of vitamin C. Annu Rev Nutr 1994; 14:371–391.
34. Murad S, Grove D, Lindberg KA, et al. Regulation of collagen synthesis by ascorbic acid. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U.S.A. 1981; 78:2879–2882.
35. Davidson JM, LuValle PA, Zoia O, et al. Ascorbate differentially regulates elastin and collagen
biosynthesis in vascular smooth muscle cells and skin fibroblasts by pretranslational mechanisms.
J Biol Chem 1997; 272:345–352.
308
Weber et al.

=== Page 326 ===
36. Ponec M, Weerheim A, Kempenaar J, et al. The formation of competent barrier lipids in reconstructed
human epidermis requires the presence of vitamin C. J Invest Dermatol 1997; 109:348–355.
37. Nakamura T, Pinnell SR, Darr D, et al. Vitamin C abrogates the deleterious effects of UVB-radiation
on cutaneous immunity by a mechanism that does not depend on TNF-a. J Invest Dermatol 1997;
109:20–24.
38. Darr D, Combs S, Dunston S, et al. Topical vitamin C protects porcine skin from ultraviolet radiation-
induced damage. Br J Dermatol 1992; 127:247–253.
39. Kobayashi S, Takehana M, Kanke M, et al. Postadministration protective effect of magnesium-L-
ascorbyl-phosphate on the development of UVB-induced cutaneous damage in mice. Photochem
Photobiol 1998; 67:669–675.
40. Dreher F, Denig N, Gabard B, et al. Effect of topical antioxidants on UV-induced erythema formation
when administered after exposure. Dermatology 1999; 198:52–55.
41. Lin JY, Selim MA, Shea CR, et al. UV photoprotection by combination topical antioxidants vitamin C
and vitamin E. J Am Acad Dermatol 2003; 48:866–874.
42. Pauling L. Effect of ascorbic acid on incidence of spontaneous mammary tumors and UV-light-
induced skin tumors in mice. Am J Clin Nutr 1991; 54:1252S–1255S.
43. Kobayashi S, Takehana M, Tohyama C. Glutathione isopropyl ester reduces UVB-induced skin
damage in hairless mice. Photochem Photobiol 1996; 63:106–110.
44. Han D, Handelman G, Marcocci L, et al. Lipoic acid increases de novo synthesis of cellular
glutathione by improving cystine utilization. Biofactors 1997; 6:321–338.
45. Hanada K, Sawamura D, Tamai K, et al. Photoprotective effect of esterified glutathione against UVB-
induced sunburn cell formation in the hairless mice. J Invest Dermatol 1997; 108:727–730.
46. Steenvoorden DP, Beijersbergen van Henegouwen G. Glutathione ethylester protects against local and
systemic suppression of contact hypersensitivity induced by UVB radiation in mice. Radiat Res 1998;
150:292–297.
47. Emonet-Piccardi N, Richard MJ, Ravanat JL, et al. Protective effects of antioxidants against UVA-
induced DNA damage in human skin fibroblasts in culture. Free Radic Res 1998; 29:307–313.
48. Steenvoorden DP, Hasselbaink DM, Beijersbergen van Henegouwen GM. Protection against
UV-induced reactive intermediates in human cells and mouse skin by glutathione precursors: a
comparison of N-acetylcysteine and glutathione ethylester. Photochem Photobiol 1998; 67:651–656.
49. Podda M, Rallis M, Traber MG, et al. Kinetic study of cutaneous and subcutaneous distribution
following topical application of [7–14C]rac-a-lipoic acid onto hairless mice. Biochem Pharmacol 1996;
52:627–633.
50. Fuchs J, Milbradt R. Antioxidant inhibition of skin inflammation induced by reactive oxidants:
evaluation of the redox couple dihydrolipoate/lipoate. Skin Pharmacol 1994; 7:278–284.
51. Podda M, Tritschler HJ, Ulrich H, et al. a-lipoic acid supplementation prevents symptoms of vitamin E
deficiency. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1994; 204:98–104.
52. Rice-Evans CA, Miller NJ, Paganga G. Structure-antioxidant activity relationships of flavonoids and
phenolic acids. Free Radic Biol Med 1996; 20:933–956.
53. Saliou C, Kitazawa M, McLaughlin L, et al. Antioxidants modulate acute solar ultraviolet radiation-
induced NF-kappa-B activation in a human keratinocyte cell line. Free Radic Biol Med 1999; 26:
174–183.
54. Gerritsen ME, Carley WW, Ranges GE, et al. Flavonoids inhibit cytokine-induced endothelial cell
adhesion protein gene expression. Am J Pathol 1995; 147:278–292.
55. Natarajan K, Manna SK, Chaturvedi MM, et al. Protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors block tumor necrosis
factor-induced activation of nuclear factor-kappaB, degradation of IkappaBalpha, nuclear trans-
location of p65, and subsequent gene expression. Arch Biochem Biophys 1998; 352:59–70.
56. Gensler HL, Timmermann BN, Valcic S, et al. Prevention of photocarcinogenesis by topical
administration of pure epigallocatechin gallate isolated from green tea. Nutr Cancer 1996; 26:325–335.
57. Wang ZY, Huang MT, Lou YR, et al. Inhibitory effects of black tea, green tea, decaffeinated black tea,
and decaffeinated green tea on UVB light-induced skin carcinogenesis in 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]
anthracene-initiated SKH-1 mice. Cancer Res 1994; 54:3428–3435.
58. Javed S, Mehrotra NK, Shukla Y. Chemopreventive effects of black tea polyphenols in mouse skin
model of carcinogenesis. Biomed Environ Sci 1998; 11:307–313.
59. Katiyar SK, Korman NJ, Mukhtar H, et al. Protective effects of silymarin against photocarcinogenesis
in a mouse skin model. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997; 89:556–566.
60. Agarwal R, Mukhtar H. Chemoprevention of photocarcinogenesis. Photochem Photobiol 1996;
63:440–444.
61. Tixier JM, Godeau G, Robert AM, et al. Evidence by in vivo and in vitro studies that binding of
pycnogenols to elastin affects its rate of degradation by elastases. Biochem Pharmacol 1984; 33:3933–3939.
62. Takahashi T, Kamiya T, Hasegawa A, et al. Procyanidin oligomers selectively and intensively
promote proliferation of mouse hair epithelial cells in vitro and activate hair follicle growth in vivo.
J Invest Dermatol 1999; 112:310–316.
Antioxidants
309

=== Page 327 ===
63. Sies H. Strategies of antioxidant defense. Eur J Biochem 1993; 215:213–219.
64. Packer JE, Slater TF, Willson RL. Direct observation of a free radical interaction between vitamin E
and vitamin C. Nature 1979; 278:737–738.
65. Wefers H, Sies H. The protection by ascorbate and glutathione against microsomal lipid peroxidation
is dependent on vitamin E. Eur J Biochem 1988; 174:353–357.
66. Gey KF. Vitamins E plus C and interacting conutrients required for optimal health: a critical and
constructive review of epidemiology and supplementation data regarding cardiovascular disease and
cancer. Biofactors 1998; 7:113–174.
67. Kamal-Eldin A, Appelqvist LA. The chemistry and antioxidant properties of tocopherols and
tocotrienols. Lipids 1996; 31:671–701.
68. Winkler BS. Unequivocal evidence in support of the nonenzymatic redox coupling between
glutathione/glutathione disulfide and ascorbic acid/dehydroascorbic acid. Biochim Biophys Acta
1992; 1117:287–290.
69. Wells WW, Xu DP, Yang YF, et al. Mammalian thioltransferase (glutaredoxin) and protein disulfide
isomerase have dehydroascorbate reductase activity. J Biol Chem 1990; 265:15361–15364.
70. May JM, Qu ZC, Whitesell RR, et al. Ascorbate recycling in human erythrocytes: role of GSH in
reducing dehydroascorbate. Free Radic Biol Med 1996; 20:543–551.
71. Wang Y, Russo TA, Kwon O, et al. Ascorbate recycling in human neutrophils: induction by bacteria.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 1997; 94:13816–13819.
72. Bast A, Haenen GR. Regulation of lipid peroxidation by glutathione and lipoic acid: involvement of
liver microsomal vitamin E free radical reductase. Adv Exp Med Biol 1990; 264:111–116.
73. Kagan V, Serbinova E, Packer L. Antioxidant effects of ubiquinones in microsomes and mitochondria
are mediated by tocopherol recycling. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990; 169:851–857.
74. Packer L, Witt EH, Tritschler HJ. a-Lipoic acid as a biological antioxidant. Free Radic Biol Med 1995;
19:227–250.
75. Cossins E, Lee R, Packer L. ESR studies of vitamin C regeneration, order of reactivity of natural source
phytochemical preparations. Biochem Mol Biol Int 1998; 45:583–597.
76. Tyrrell RM. UV activation of mammalian stress proteins. EXS 1996; 77:255–271.
77. Herrlich P, Blattner C, Knebel A, et al. Nuclear and nonnuclear targets of genotoxic agents in the
induction of gene expression: shared principles in yeast, rodents, man, and plants. Biol Chem 1997;
378:1217–1229.
78. Beg AA, Sha WC, Bronson RT, et al. Constitutive NF-kappa B activation, enhanced granulopoiesis,
and neonatal lethality in IkappaBalpha-deficient mice. Genes Dev 1995; 9:2736–2746.
79. Klement JF, Rice NR, Car BD, et al. IkappaBalpha deficiency results in a sustained NF-kappaB
response and severe widespread dermatitis in mice. Mol Cell Biol 1996; 16:2341–2349.
80. Flohe L, Brigelius-Flohe R, Saliou C, et al. Redox regulation of NF-kappa B activation. Free Radic Biol
Med 1997; 22:1115–1126.
81. Packer L, Weber SU, Rimbach G. Molecular aspects of a-tocotrienol antioxidant action and cell
signaling. J Nutr 2001; 131:369S–373S.
82. Boscoboinik D, Szewczyk A, Hensey C, et al. Inhibition of cell proliferation by a-tocopherol: role of
protein kinase C. J Biol Chem 1991; 266:6188–6194.
83. Ricciarelli R, Maroni P, Ozer N, et al. Age-dependent increase of collagenase expression can be
reduced by a-tocopherol via protein kinase C inhibition. Free Radic Biol Med 1999; 27:729–737.
84. Schena M, Heller RA, Theriault TP, et al. Microarrays: biotechnology’s discovery platform for
functional genomics. Trends Biotechnol 1998; 16:301–306.
310
Weber et al.

=== Page 328 ===
29
UV Filters
Stanley B. Levy
Department of Dermatology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
and Revlon Research Center, Edison, New Jersey, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
The presence of UV filters in skin care and cosmetic products represents a key benefit that
cosmetics can provide consumers. The hazards of ultraviolet (UV) light exposure are well
known. It is estimated that the incidence of non-melanoma skin cancer in the United States
exceeds one million cases per year (1). UV-induced or photoaging accounts for most of the age-
associated changes in skin appearance (2). UV radiation (UVR) damages the skin by both direct
effects on DNA and indirectly on the skin’s immune system (3).
In animal models, sunscreens prevent the formation of squamous cell carcinomas of the
skin (4). The regular use of sunscreens has been shown to reduce the number of actinic or
precancerous keratoses (5) and solar elastosis (6). Daily sunscreen use on the hands and face
reduced the total incidence of squamous cell carcinoma in an Australian study (7). Sunscreens
also prevent immunosuppression (8). Double-blind photoaging studies show consistent
improvement in the “untreated” control groups partly because of the use of sunscreens by all
study subjects (9).
The effect of sunscreen use on melanoma is less clear. A meta-analysis of population-
based studies of population-based case control studies found no effect of sunscreen use on risk
for melanoma (10). Nevertheless, observational studies suggest that intermittent or intense sun
exposure is associated with increased risk for melanoma (11), supporting the hypothesis that
preventing sunburn especially in childhood may reduce the lifetime risk of melanoma.
The cosmetic formulator has an expanding menu of active sunscreen ingredients for
incorporation into a variety of cosmetic formulations. Selection is restricted by regulatory
agencies in the country in which the final product is to be marketed. This chapter will
concentrate on reviewing available UV filters.
DEFINITIONS
UVR reaching the Earth’s surface can be divided into UVB (290–320 nm) and UVA (320–
400 nm). UVA can be further subdivided into UVA I (340–400 nm) or far UVA and UVA II
(320–340 nm) or near UVA.
The sun protection factor (SPF) is defined as the dose of UVR required to produce
1 minimal erythema dose (MED) on protected skin after application of 2 mg/cm2 of product
divided by the UVR to produce 1 MED on unprotected skin. A “water-resistant” product
maintains the SPF level after 40 minutes of water immersion. A “very water-resistant” or
“waterproof” product is tested after 80 minutes of water immersion. If the SPF level is
diminished by immersion, a separate SPF level may be listed. A “broad-spectrum” or “full-
spectrum” sunscreen provides both UVB and UVA protection. Ideally, this includes both
UVA I and UVA II coverages.
HISTORY
Acidified quinine sulfate was proposed for use as a chemical sunscreen in the 1890s (12). At the
beginning of the 20th century, Unna found aesculin, a chestnut extract used in folk medicine
for many years, to be more effective. Two UV filters, benzyl salicylate and benzyl cinnamate,
were first incorporated into a commercially available sunscreen emulsion in the United States
in 1928 (13). In the early 1930s, phenyl salicylate (salol) was used in an Australian product (14).

=== Page 329 ===
Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) was patented in 1943, leading to the development of PABA
derivative UV filters. During World War II, red veterinary petrolatum (RVP) was used by the
U.S. military, encouraging the development of further UV filters in the post-war period.
In the 1970s, increased interest in commercial sunscreen products led to refinements and
consumer acceptance of these products over the next two decades. Facilitated by growing
awareness as to the hazards of UVR, higher SPF products became the norm. Daily use
consumer products containing UV filters, including moisturizers, color cosmetics, and even
hair care products, have become more prevalent in the past decade. Concerns related to the
adequacy of sunscreen protection for the prevention of melanoma and photoaging in the last
few years have led to greater interest in broad-spectrum sunscreen UV protection throughout
the entire UVA range.
REGULATORY
United States
Sunscreen products in the United States are regulated by the FDA as over-the-counter (OTC)
drugs. The final monograph for sunscreen drug products for OTC human use (Federal Register
1999: 64: 27666–27693) established the conditions for safety, efficacy, and labeling of these
products. A recently proposed amendment (Federal Register 2007: 72: 49070–49122) further
elaborates on UVB (SPF) and UVA testing and labeling. As active ingredients in drug products,
they are listed by their United States Adopted Names (USAN). There are 16 approved
sunscreen ingredients (Table 1). All permitted UV filters can be used with any other permitted
filters except avobenzone. The latter cannot be used with PABA, octyl dimethyl PABA,
meridamate, and titanium dioxide (TiO2). Maximum allowable concentrations are provided.
Minimum concentration requirements were dropped, providing that the concentration of each
active ingredient is sufficient to contribute a minimum SPF of not less than 2 to a finished
product. A sunscreen product must have a minimum SPF of not less than the number of active
sunscreen ingredients used in combination multiplied by 2.
The proposed recent amendment allows products with SPF values above 50, but the SPF
declaration for sunscreens with SPF values above 50 are limited to SPF 50þ. The term
“sunblock” is prohibited. The term “UVB” is to be included before the term “SPF” on the
principal product display panel. Newer labeling requires the listing of UV filters not only as
active ingredients but also their concentration in the product. To address the inadequacies of
any single UVA rating system, the FDA proposes a combination of spectrophotometric (in
vitro) and clinical (in vivo) UVA testing procedure to allow for a nonnumerical UVA
protection four-star rating system, with one star being low protection and four stars being the
Table 1
FDA Sunscreen Final Monograph Ingredients
Drug name
Concentration (%)
Absorbance
Aminobenzoic acid
Up to 15
UVB
Avobenzone
2–3
UVAI
Cinoxate
Up to 3
UVB
Dioxybenzone
Up to 3
UVB, UVAII
Ensulizole
Up to 4
UVB
Homosalate
Up to 15
UVB
Meradimate
Up to 5
UVAII
Octocrylene
Up to 10
UVB
Octinoxate
Up to 7.5
UVB
Octisalate
Up to 5
UVB
Oxybenzone
Up to 6
UVB, UVAII
Padimate O
Up to 8
UVB
Sulisobenzone
Up to 10
UVB, UVAII
Titanium dioxide
2 to 25
Physical
Trolamine salicylate
Up to 12
UVB
Zinc oxide
2 to 20
Physical
Abbreviations: FDA, Food and Drug Administration; UV, ultraviolet.
312
Levy

=== Page 330 ===
highest. The in vivo study to be used is the persistent pigment-darkening (PPD) method (15).
The Boots adaptation of the Diffey/Robson method was proposed for in vitro testing in the
recent amendment.
Europe
In Europe, sunscreen products are considered to be cosmetics, their function being to protect
the skin from sunburn. The Third Amendment of the European Economic Community (EEC)
Directive provides a definition and lists the UV filters that cosmetic products may contain.
Table 2 lists UV filters that are fully permitted as amended most recently through commission
directives 2003/83/EC and 2005/9/EC. As cosmetic products, cosmetic or International
Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary (INCI) nomenclature is used as listed in the CTFA International
Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary. The European Union (EU) allows, at the date of covering this
chapter, several ingredients not available in the United States (see discussion below). The EU
has added TiO2 to the approved list. Zinc oxide (ZnO) is not included in this list but may be
used as a cosmetic ingredient.
A more recent commission directive 2006/647/EC provides further guidance on UVA/
UVB efficacy claims. The PPD method is clinically recommended. For in vitro testing, the
critical wavelength method (16) is to be used, in contrast to the Boots’ adaptation
recommended by the FDA.
Australia
Sunscreens in Australia are regulated as therapeutic goods. The latest edition of Australian
Standard 2604 was published in 1993 as a joint publication of Australia and New Zealand.
Sunscreen products are classified as either primary or secondary, depending on whether the
primary function of the designated product is to protect from UVR as opposed to a product
with a primary cosmetic purpose. SPF designations greater than 30 are not permitted (SPF 30þ
represents the maximum designation). In general, Australian Approved Names (AAN) for
allowed active sunscreen ingredients are the same as FDA drug nomenclature with a few
differences.
Other Countries
Most non–EEC countries follow the EEC directive. Many other countries follow U.S. trends
with their own provisions. In Japan, sunscreens are classified as cosmetics. Regulations for
each individual country need to be consulted for selection of the various UV filters for
incorporation into a sunscreen product to be marketed in a given jurisdiction (17).
MECHANISM OF ACTION
UV filters have been traditionally divided into chemical absorber and physical blockers on the
basis of their mechanism of action. Chemical sunscreens are generally aromatic compounds
conjugated with a carbonyl group (13). These chemicals absorb high-intensity UV rays with
excitation to a higher-energy state. The energy lost results in conversion of the remaining
energy into longer lower-energy wavelengths with return to ground state. The evolution of
modern sunscreen chemicals represents a prototype study in the use of structure-activity
relationships to design new active ingredients and has been well reviewed elsewhere (18).
Physical blockers reflect or scatter UVR. Newer microsized forms of physical blockers may
also function in part by absorption (19). Sometimes referred to as “non-chemical” sunscreens,
they may be more appropriately designated as inorganic particulate sunscreen ingredients.
NOMENCLATURE
Sunscreen nomenclature can be quite confusing. They may be referred to by their chemical or
trade name. In the United States, individual sunscreen ingredients are also assigned a drug
name by the OTC monograph. Annex VII of the EU may use either a drug or chemical name.
Australia has its own approved list of names (AAN). Table 3 lists the most commonly used
names, including their primary listing in the INCI designation (20).
UV Filters
313

=== Page 331 ===
Table 2
List of UV Filters That Cosmetic Products May Contain (EEC Directive Annex VII – Part 1)
Reference
number
Substance
INCI name
Maximum authorized
concentration (%)
1
4-Aminobenzoic acid
PABA
5
2
N,N,N-trimethyl-4-(2-oxoborn-
3-ylidenemethyl) anilinium
methyl sulfate
Camphor benzylkonium
methosulfate
6
3
Homosalate (INN)
Homosalate
10
4
Oxybenzone (INN)
Benzophenone -3
10
6
2-Phenylbenzimidazole-5-sulfonic
acid and its potassium, sodium,
and triethanolamine salts
Phenylbenzyimidazole
sulfonic acid
8 (expressed as acid)
7
3,3’-(1,4-Phenylenedimethylene)bis[7,7-
dimethyl-2-oxo-bicyclo-(2,2,1)hept-1-
ylmethanesulfonic acid] and its salts
Terephthalidene
dicamphor sulfonic
acid
10 (expressed as acid)
8
1-(4-Tert-butylphenyl)-3-(4-
methoxyphenyl) propane-1,3-dione
Butyl methoxy
dibenzoyl-methane
5
9
a-(2-Oxobron-3-ylidene)toluene-4-
sulfonic acid and its salts
Benzylidene camphor
sulfonic acid
10 (expressed as acid)
10
2-Cyano-3,3-diphenyl acrylic acid,
2-ethylnexyl ester
Octocrylene
10 (expressed as acid)
11
Polymer of N-(2 and 4)-[(2-oxoborn-3-
ylidene)methyl] benzyl acrylamide
Polyacrylamidomethyl
benzylidene camphor
6
12
Octyl methoxycinnamate
Ethyl hexyl
methoxy-cinnamate
10
13
Ethoxylated ethyl-4-aminobenzoate
PEG-35 PABA
10
14
Isopentyl-4-methoxycinnamate
Isoamyl p-methoxy
cinnamate
10
15
2,4,6-Trianilino-(p-carbo-2’-ethylhexyl-
1’-oxy)-1,3,5-triazine
Octyl triazone
5
16
Phenol,2-(2H-benzotriazol-2-yl)-4-
methyl-6-(2-methyl-3-(1,3,3,3-
tetramethyl-1-(trimethylsilyl)oxy)-
disiloxanyl)propyl) (drometrizone
trisiloxane)
Drometrizone Trisiloxane
15
17
Benzoic acid, 4,4-((6-(((1,1-
dimethylethyl)amino)carbonyl)phenyl)
amino)-1,3,5,triazine-2,4-diyl)diimino)
bis-cbis(2-ethylhexyl)ester)
Diethylhexyl butamido
triazone
10
18
3-(4’-Methylbenzylidene)-d-t camphor
4-Methylbenzylidene
camphor
2
19
3-Benzylidene camphor
3-Benzylidene camphor
2
20
2-Ethylhexyl salicylate
Octyl salicylate
5
21
4-Dimethyl-amino-benzoate of
ethyl-2-hexyl
Octyl dimethyl PABA
8
22
2-Hydroxy-4-methoxybenzophenone-
5-sulfonic acid and its sodium salt
Benzophenone-5
5 (of acid)
23
2,2’-Methylene-bis-6-(2H-benzotriazol-
2yl)-4-(tetramethylbutyl-1,1,3,3,-
phenol)
Bisoctyltriazol
10
24
Monosodium salt of 2-2’-bis-(1,4-
phenylene) 1H-benzimidazole-4,6-
disulphonic acid
Bisamidazylate
10 (of acid)
25
(1,3,5)-Triazine-2,4-bis ((4-(2-ethyl-
hexyloxyl)-2-hydroxy)-phenyl)-6-(4-
methoxyphenyl)
Anisotriazine
10
26
Dimethicodiethylbenzalmalonate
(CAS No 207574-74-1)
10
27
Titanium dioxide
25
28
Benzoic acid, 2-(4-(diethylamino)-2 –
hydrobenzoyl)-, hexylester
Dithylamino hydroxybenzoyl
hexyl benzoate
10
Abbreviations: EEC, European Economic Community; UV, ultraviolet; PABA, para-aminobenzoic acid; INCI,
International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary.
314
Levy

=== Page 332 ===
Table 3
Sunscreen Nomenclature
CAS #
Drug name (FDA)
INCI name
Colipa #
EU reference #
Trade names
Solubility
Spectrum
150-13-0
Aminobenzoic acid
PABA
S 1
1
4-Aminobenzoic acid
Hydrophilic
UVB
70356-09-1
Avobenzone
Butyl methoxydibenzyl
methane
S 66
8
Parsol 1789
Lipophilic
UVA I
104-28-9
Cinoxate
Cinoxate
Lipophilic
UVB
92761-26-7
Ecamzule
Terephthalydene
dicamphor
sulfonic acid
S 71
7
Mexoryl SX
Hydrophilic
27503-81-7
Ensulizole
Phenylbenzimidazole
sulfonic acid
S 45
6
Eusolex 232, Neo
Heliopan Hydro
Hydrophilic
UVB
118-56-9
Homosalate
Homosalate
S 12
3
Eusolex HMS
Lipophilic
UVB
134-09-8
Meradimate
Menthyl anthranilate
Dermoblock MA, Neo
Heliopan, Type MA
Lipophilic
UVA II
6197-30-4
Octocrylene
Octocrylene
S 32
10
Escalol 597, Eusolex OCR,
Uvinul N-539-50
Lipophilic
UVB
5466-77-3
Octyl
methoxycinnamate
Octyl
methoxycinnamate
S 28
12
Neo Heliopan AV,
Parsol MCX,
Eusolex 2292
Lipophilic
UVB
88122-99-0
Octyl triazone
Octyl triazone
S 69
15
Uvinul T-150
Lipophilic
UVB
118-60-5
Octisalate
Octyl salicylate
S 20
8
Escalol 587, Eusolex BS,
Uvinul O-18
Lipophilic
UVB
131-57-7
Oxybenzone
Benzophenone-3
S 38
4
Eusolex 4360, Neo Heliopan,
Uvinul M40
Lipophilic
UVB, UVA II
21245-02-03
Padimate O
Octyl dimethyl PABA
S 78
17
Escalol 507, Eusolex 6007
Lipophilic
UVB
4065-45-6
Sulisobenzone
Benzophenone-4
S 78
17
Escalol 577, Uvinul MS 40
Lipophilic
UVB, UVA II
Abbreviations: FDA, Food and Drug Administration; INCI, International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary; PABA, para-aminobenzoic acid.
UV Filters
315

=== Page 333 ===
INDIVIDUAL UV FILTERS
Sunscreen ingredients may be considered by dividing them into larger overall classes by
chemical structure. They may also be classified by their absorption spectrum. Although the
lists of UV filters approved by the various regulatory agencies may seem quite extensive, fewer
are used with any degree of frequency. The discussion, which follows, will concentrate on
those listed in Table 3.
UVB
PABA and Its Derivatives
PABA was one of the first chemical sunscreen chemicals to be widely available. Several
problems limited its use. It is very water soluble, was frequently used in alcoholic vehicles,
stained clothing, and was associated with photodermatitis. Ester derivatives of PABA, mainly
octyl dimetyl PABA or padimate O, became more popular with greater compatibility in a
variety of more substantive vehicles and a lower potential for staining or adverse reactions.
Amyl dimethyl PABA and glyceryl PABA (glyceryl aminobenzoate) are no longer used.
Padimate O or octyl dimethyl PABA is a most potent UV absorber in the mid-UVB range.
Because of problems with PABA formulations, marketers have emphasized the “PABA-free”
claim. Although still used (21), it is confused with PABA, limiting its use. The decline in the
use of this PABA derivative along with the demand for higher SPF products has led to the
incorporation of multiple active ingredients in a single product to achieve the desired SPF.
Cinnamates
The next most potent UVB absorbers allowed by the FDA monograph, the cinnamates, have
largely replaced PABA derivatives. Octinoxate or octyl methoxycinnamate is the most
frequently used sunscreen ingredient (21). Octyl or ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate is in order of
magnitude less potent than padimate O and requires additional UVB absorbers to achieve
higher SPF levels in a final product. Cinoxate (ethoxy-ethyl-p-methoxycinnamate) is less-
widely used. Isoamyl p-methoxycinnamate (EU no. 14) is available in Europe.
Salicylates
Salicylates are weaker UVB absorbers. They have a long history of use but were supplanted by
the more efficient PABA and cinnamate derivatives. They are generally used to augment other
UVB absorbers. With the trend to higher SPFs, more octisalate or octyl salicylate (ethylhexyl
salicylate) is being used followed by homosalate or homomenthyl salicylate. Both materials
have the ability to solubilize oxybenzone and avobenzone. Trolamine or triethanolamine
salicylate has good water solubility.
Camphor Derivatives
Not approved by the FDA for use in the United States, there are six camphor derivatives
approved in Europe, and 4-methylbenzylidene camphor (EU no. 18) is the most widely used
one (21).
Octocrylene
2-Ethylhexyl-2-cyano-3,3 diphenylacrylate or octocrylene is chemically related to cinnamates.
It can be used to boost SPF and improve water resistance in a given formulation. Octocrylene is
photostabile and can improve the photostability of other sunscreens. It is expensive and can
present difficulties in formulation.
Phenylbenzimadazole Sulfonic Acid
Phenylbenzimadazole sulfonic acid or ensulizole is a water-soluble UVB absorber that can be
used in the water phase of emulsion systems, in contrast to most oil-soluble sunscreen
ingredients, allowing for a less-greasy, more aesthetically pleasing formulation such as a daily
use moisturizer containing sunscreen. Phenybenzimidazole sulfonic acid boosts the SPF of
organic and inorganic sunscreens. It can also be used in clear gels owing to its water solubility.
316
Levy

=== Page 334 ===
Triazones
Octyl or ethylhexyl triazone (EHT) is a UVB filter available in Europe (EU no. 15). It is eligible
to enter the FDA sunscreen monograph through the FDA time and extent application (TEA)
process (22), but not yet available. Diethylhexyl butamido triazone (DBT) (methylene bis-
benzotriazol tetramethylbutylphenol—EU no. 23) or Tinasorb M is a newer, more efficient
UVB filter with improved solubility over EHT. (23). An anisotriazine or bis-ethylhexyloxyphenol
methoxyphenyl triazine (BEMT) or Tinasorb S (EU no. 25) is a new broadband filter, which also
provides UVA protection (22), as does Tinasorb M, methylene-bis-benzotriazolyl tetramethyl-
butyl phenol (MBBT) or bisoctyltriazol (EU no. 23). Both Tinasorb ingredients have also been
submitted for the FDA approval through the TEA process.
UVA
Benzophenones
Although oxybenzone or benzophenone-3 absorbs most efficiently in the UVB range,
absorption extends well into the UVA II range. It is used primarily as a UVA absorber, but
boosts SPF values in combination with other UVB absorbers. Oxybenzone is supplied as a solid
material and has poor solubility and a relatively low extinction coefficient. Sulisobenzone or
benzophenone-4 is water soluble, somewhat unstable, and used with less frequency.
Menthyl Anthanilate
Meradimate or menthyl anthralate is a weak UVB filter, with absorption mainly in the near
UVA portion of the spectrum. It is less effective than benzophenones in this range and is less
widely used.
Butylmethoxydibenzoylmethane
Avobenzone or Parsol 1789 is the only current pure UVA filter approved by the FDA for use in
OTC sunscreens in the United States. It has been used in Europe for a considerably longer
period. It provides strong absorption in the UVA I range with peak absorption at 360 nm. Since
standards for measuring UVA protection in the United States have only been proposed, a
minimum use concentration has been set at 2% with a maximum of 3%.
Photostability refers to the ability of a molecule to remain intact with irradiation.
Photostability is potentially a problem with all UV filters. This issue been raised specifically
with avobenzone (24). This effect may degrade other sunscreens in a formulation, including
octyl methoxycinnamate. Octocrylene and some of the newer suncreens, including BEMT,
stabilized avobenzone (25). Non-UV filters such as diethylhexyl 2,6 napthalate may also be
used (22). Overall formulation with avobenzone is therefore critical in this regard.
Tetraphthalydine Dicamphor Sulfonic Acid
3,3’-(1,4-phenylenedimethylene)bis[7,7-dimethyl-2-oxo-bicyclo-(2,2,1)hept-1-yl methanesul-
fonic acid (EU no. 7) or Mexoryl SX is a UVA blocker more recently available in Europe
with comparable (26) or superior efficacy to avobenzone (27). Only specific formulations by the
patent holder with this ingredient have been approved in the United States.
Physical Blockers
Some of the original sunblocks were opaque formulations reflecting or scattering UVR. Color
cosmetics containing a variety of inorganic pigments function in this fashion. TiO2 and ZnO
are chemically inert and protect through the full spectrum of UVR. They offer significant
advantages. Poor cosmetic acceptance limited the widespread use of these two ingredients
until microsized forms became available. By decreasing particle size of these materials to a
microsize or ultrafine grade, it is less visible on the skin surface.
Micropigmentary sunblocks function differently than opaque sunblocks of pigmented
color cosmetics by absorbing and not simply reflecting or scattering UVR (19). By varying and
mixing particle sizes, differing levels of photoprotection are achieved throughout the UV
spectrum. In addition to avobenzone, micropigmentary TiO2 and ZnO offer the best available
protection in the UVA II range.
UV Filters
317

=== Page 335 ===
Photoreactivity has been raised as an issue with these materials. Both TiO2 and ZnO are
semiconductors potentially absorbing light and generating reactive species (28). These effects
have been demonstrated in vitro (29). Coating these materials reduces their photochemical
reactivity. The in vivo relevance of these effects has not been demonstrated, and both materials
have a long history of safe use. Physical blockers also have the significant advantage of
lowered skin irritancy potential.
Titanium Dioxide
TiO2 was the first micropigment extensively used. Advantages include a broad spectrum of
protection and inability to cause contact dermatitis. The use of rutile as opposed to anastase
crystal forms of TiO2 lessens photoactivity. Newer materials are amphiphilic designed to be
dispersed in both water and oil emulsion phases. Particle size and uniformity of dispersion is
key to achieving SPF. Primary particle size may be 10 to 15 nm with secondary particle
assembly to 100 nm. Particle size needs to be less than 200 nm to achieve transparency.
Despite advances in the technology and understanding of these materials, whitening
remains a problem secondary to pigment residue. Adding other pigment-simulating fleshtones
may partially camouflage this effect. The net effect may be that the user is inclined to make a
less-heavy application of product effectively lowering SPF (30). “Hybrid” formulations
employing a combination of chemical absorbers with inorganic particulates may represent a
practical compromise.
Zinc Oxide
ZnO was added as an active sunscreen agent for the FDA OTC sunscreen monograph with
avobenzone. Reduced to a particle size of less than 200 nm, light scattering is minimized and
the particles appear transparent in thin films (31). ZnO has a refractive index of 1.9, as opposed
to 2.6 for TiO2, and therefore causes less whitening than TiO2. ZnO attenuates UVR more
effectively in the UVA I range (32) with a peak at 360 nm. Microfine TiO2 at an equal
concentration offers somewhat more protection in the UVB range. Fine particle ZnO is not
approved as a sunscreen ingredient in the EU. It is approved as a cosmetic colorant and as a
general cosmetic ingredient.
FORMULATION
A detailed discussion of incorporating UV filters into various vehicles to achieve defined goals
for efficacy and aesthetics is beyond the scope of this chapter and has been well reviewed
elsewhere (33). Briefly, the first step is to determine the type of product, SPF and UVA efficacy
levels, aesthetics, and nonsunscreen claims desired. Sunscreen actives are chosen realizing that
most products use multiple actives comprising up to 35% of the final formulation. Sunscreen
ingredients are among the most expensive used in cosmetic formulation. Vehicle type
determines which actives can be used on the basis of polarity and solubility characteristics of
individual filters. The most commonly used sunscreen actives are oils significantly affecting
greasiness. Inorganic particulates such as ZnO and TiO2 tend to make products feel dry and
drag on application. Emulsions are the most popular vehicles to ideally incorporate active
ingredients into both water and oil phases for greater efficiency. The final products, rheological
profile and polymer levels, determine that a uniform film coats the surface of insure UV
efficacy. Water resistance needs to be considered (34). Lastly, a photostable system needs to be
designed.
ADVERSE REACTIONS—TOXICITY
In a longitudinal prospective study of 603 subjects applying daily either an SPF 15þ broad-
spectrum sunscreen containing octyl methoxycinnamate and avobenzone or a vehicle cream,
19% developed an adverse reaction (35). Interestingly, the rates of reaction to both the active
and vehicle creams were similar, emphasizing the importance of excipient ingredients in the
318
Levy

=== Page 336 ===
vehicle. The majority of reactions were irritant in nature. Not surprisingly, a disproportionate
50% of the reacting subjects were atopic. Less than 10% of the reactions were allergic, with none of
the subjects patch tested actually found to be allergic to an individual sunscreen ingredient.
Subjective irritation associated with burning or stinging without objective erythema from
some organic UV filters (36) is the most frequent sensitivity complaint associated with
sunscreen use. This is most frequently experienced in the eye area. Longer-lasting objective
irritant contact dermatitis may be difficult to distinguish from true allergic contact dermatitis.
In a post-market evaluation of sunscreen sensitivity complaints in 57 patients, 20 patients had
short-lasting symptoms, 26 long-lasting symptoms, and 11 mixed or borderline symptoms (37).
Half of the patients were patch and photopatch tested, and only three showed positive
reactions to sunscreen ingredients.
Contact and photocontact sensitivity to individual sunscreen ingredients has been
extensively reviewed (38). Considering their widespread use, the number of documented
allergic reactions is not high (36). PABA and PABA esters accounted for many of the early-
reported reactions, but with a decrease in their use, an increase in reactions to benzophenones
was reported (39). Skin reaction is probably higher with benzophenones than other UV filters
(40). Fragrances, preservatives, and other excipients account for a large number of the allergic
reactions seen (38).
Virtually all sunscreen ingredients reported to cause contact allergy may be photo-
allergens. Although still relatively uncommon, sunscreen actives seem to have become the
leading cause of photocontact allergic reactions (41,42). Individuals with preexisting eczem-
atous conditions have a significant predisposition to sensitization associated with their
impaired cutaneous barrier. The majority of individuals who develop photocontact dermatitis
to sunscreens are patients with photodermatides (38).
Contact sensitivity is not an issue with the use of physical blockers. However, concerns
with dermal penetration with the use of nanoparticles have more recently been raised. Several
studies examining the dermal penetration of pigmentary particles greater than 100 mm and
microfine TiO2 and ZnO would indicate that they do not penetrate the skin and remain in the
stratum corneum (40).
Some organic sunscreens show estrogenic activity in screening toxicological assays (43).
In vivo studies would question the relevance of this in humans (44). Clearly, the benefits of sun
protection outweigh these risks.
CONCLUSION
A limited menu of UV filters for incorporation into sunscreen products is available to the
formulating chemist, depending on regulatory requirements in an individual country or
jurisdiction. With the demand for higher SPFs, the trend has been to use more individual and a
wider variety of agents in newer products. Recent research in sunscreen efficacy has emphasized
the need for products protecting against the full UV spectrum with a limited number of available
agents. Regulatory agencies are often slow to approve new ingredients. Rules governing the
approval of new ingredients by the EEC are more flexible.
Sunscreen efficacy remains very dependent on vehicle formulation. Solvents and emollients
can have a profound effect on the strength of UV absorbance by the active ingredients and at which
wavelengths they absorb (45). Film formers and emulsifiers determine the uniformity and thickness
of the film formed on the skin surface, which in turn determines SPF level, durability, and water
resistance (46). Lastly, product aesthetics play a large role in product acceptance, particularly with
sunscreens being incorporated into daily use cosmetics. These constraints provide the sunscreen
formulator with significant challenges in developing new and improved formulations.
REFERENCES
1. Weinstock MA. Death from skin cancer among the elderly: epidemiological patterns. Arch Dermatol
1997; 133:1207–1209.
2. Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. Photoageing: mechanism, prevention and therapy. Br J Dermatol 2007; 157:
874–887.
UV Filters
319

=== Page 337 ===
3. Kullavanijaya P, Lim HW. Photoprotection. J Am Acad Dermatol 2005; 52:937–958.
4. Gurish MF, Roberts LK, Krueger GG, et al. The effect of various sunscreen agents on skin damage and
the induction of tumor susceptibility in mice subjected to ultraviolet irradiation. J Invest Dermatol
1975; 65:543–546.
5. Thompson SC, Jolley D, Marks R. Reduction of solar keratoses by regular sunscreen use. N Engl J Med
1993; 329:1147–1151.
6. Boyd AS, Naylor M, Cameron GS, et al. The effects of chronic sunscreen use on the histologic changes
of dermatoheliosis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 33:941–946.
7. van der Pols JC, Williams GM, Pandeya N, et al. Prolonged prevention of squamous cell carcinoma of
the skin by regular sunscreen use. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2006; 15(12):2546–2548.
8. Roberts LK, Beasley DG. Commercial sunscreen lotions prevent ultraviolet-radiation-induced
immune suppression of contact hypersensitivity. J Invest Dermatol 1995; 105:339–344.
9. Stiller MJ, Bartolone J, Stern R, et al. Topical 8% glycolic acid and 8% L-lactic acid creams for the
treatment of photodamaged skin: A double-blind vehicle-controlled clinical trial. Arch Dermatol 1996;
132:631–636.
10. Huncharek M, Kupelnick B. Use of topical sunscreens and the risk of malignant melanoma: a meta-
analyisi of 9067 patients from 11 case control studies. Am J Public Health 2002: 92:1173–1177.
11. CDC. Counseling to prevent skin cancer: recommendations and rationale of the US Preventative
Services Task force. MMWR 2003; 52(No.RR-15):13–17.
12. Urbach F. The historical aspect of sunscreens. J Photochem Photobio 2001; 64:99–104.
13. Shaath NA. Sunscreen evolution. In: Shaath NA, ed. Sunscreens: Regulation and Commercial
Development. 3rd. ed. Boca Raton: Taylor and Francis, 2005:218–238.
14. Rebut, R. The sunscreen industry in Europe: Past, present, and future. In: Lowe NJ, Shaath NA, eds.
Sunscreens:Development, Evaluation, and Regulatory Aspects. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1990:
161–178.
15. Moyal D, Chardon A, Kollias N. UVA protection efficacy of sunscreens can be determined by
persistant pigment darkening (PPD) method. (Part 2). Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2000;
16:250–255.
16. Diffey BL, Tanner PR, Matts PJ, et al. In vitro assessment of the broad spectrum ultravioletprotection
of sunscreen products. J Am Acad Dermatol 2000; 43:1024–1035.
17. Steinberg DC. Regulations of sunscreens worldwide. In: Shaath NA, ed. Sunscreens: Regulation and
Commercial Development. 3rd. ed. Boca Raton: Taylor and Francis, 2005: 173–198.
18. Shaath NA. On the theory of ultraviolet absorption by sunscreen chemicals. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1987;
82:193.
19. Sayre RM, Killias N, Roberts RL, et al. Physical sunscreens. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1990; 41:103–109.
20. Wenninger JA, McEwen GN Jr., eds. International cosmetic ingredient dictionary and handbook. 12th
ed. Washington: The Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association, 2008.
21. Steinberg DC. Frequency of use of organic UV filters as reported to the FDA. Cosmet Toilet 2003;
118:10:81–83.
22. Tuchinda C, Lim HW, Osterwalder MS, et al. Novel emerging sunscreen technologies. Dermatol Clin
2006; 24:145–117.
23. Herzog B, Hueglin D, Osterwalder U. New sunscreen actives. In: Shaath NA, ed. Sunscreens:
Regulation and Commercial Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor and Francis, 2005: 218–238.
24. Deflandre A, Lang G. Photostability assessment of sunscreens. Benzylidene camphor and dibenzoyl-
methane derivatives. Int J Cosmet Sci 1988; 10:53–62.
25. Chatelain E, Gabard B. Photostabilization of butylmethoxybenzoylmethane (Avobenzone) and
ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate by bis-ethylhexylphenol methoxy triazine (Tinisorb S), a new UV
broadband filter. Photchem Photobiol 2001; 74:401–406.
26. Moyal D. Prevention of ultraviolet-induced skin pigmentation. Photodermatol Photoimmunol
Photomed 2004; 20:243–247.
27. Seite S, Colige A, Piquemal-Vivenot P, et al. A full-spectrum absorbing daily use cream protects
human skin against biological changes occuring in photoaging. Photodermatol Photoimmunol
Photomed 2000; 16:147–155.
28. Murphy GM. Sunblocks: mechanisms of action. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 1999; 15:
34–36.
29. Wamer WG, Yin JJ, Wei RR. Oxidative damage to nucleic acids photosensitized by titanium dioxide.
Free Radic Biol Med 1997; 23:851–858.
30. Diffey BL, Grice J. The influence of sunscreen type on photoprotection. Br J Dermatology 1999;
137:103–105.
31. Fairhurst D, Mitchnik MA. Particulate sun blocks: general principles. In: Lowe NJ, Shaath NA,
Pathak MA, eds. Sunscreens: Development, Evaluation, and Regulatory Aspects. 2nd ed. New York:
Marcel Dekker, 1997:313–352.
320
Levy

=== Page 338 ===
32. Mitchnick MA, Fairhurst D, Pinnell SR. Microfine zinc oxide (Z-Cote) as a photostable UVA/UVB
sunblock agent. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999; 40:85–90.
33. Tanner PR. Sunscreen product formulation. Dermatol Clin 2006; 24:53–62.
34. Agin PP. Water resistance and extended wear sunscreens. Dermatol Clin 2006; 24:75–79.
35. Foley P, Nixon R, Marks R, et al. The frequency of reactions to sunscreens:results of a longitudinal
population-based study on the regular use of sunscreens in Australia. Br J Dermatology 1993; 128:
512–518.
36. Dromgoole SH, Maibach HI. Sunscreening agent intolerance:contact and photocontact sensitization
and contact urticaria. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990; 22:1068–1078.
37. Fischer T, Bergstrom K, Evaluation of customers’ complaints about sunscreen cosmetics sold by the
Swedish pharmaceutical company. Contact Dermatitis 1991; 25:319–322.
38. Schauder S, Ippen H. Contact and photocontact sensitivity to sunscreens. Review of a 15-year
experience and of the literature. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37(5):221–232
39. Lenique P, Machet L, Vaillant L, et al. Contact and photocontact allergy to oxybenzone. Contact
Dermatitis 1992; 26:177–181.
40. Nash JF. Human safety and efficacy of ultraviolet filters and sunscreen products. Dermatol Clin 2006;
24:35–51.
41. Fotiades J, Soter NA, Lim HW. Results of evaluation of 203 patients for photosensitivity in a 7.3-year
period. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 33(4):597–602.
42. Trevisi P, Vincenzi C, Chieregato C, et al. Sunscreen sensitization. A three-year study. Dermatology
1994; 189:55–57.
43. Schlumpf M, Schmid P, Durrer S, et al. Endocrine activity and developmental toxicity of cosmetic UV
filters–an update. Toxicology 2004; 205:113–122.
44. Janjua NR, Morgensen B, Anderson AM, et al. Systemic absorption of the sunscreens benzophenone-3,
octyl-methoxycinnamate, and 3-(4-methyl-benzylidene) camphor after whole-body topical application
and reproductive hormone levels in humans. J Invest Dermatol 2004; 123(1):57–61.
45. Agrapidis-Paloympis LE, Nash RA, Shaath NA. The effect of solvents on the ultraviolet absorbance of
sunscreens. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1987; 38:209–221.
46. Klein K. Formulating sunscreen products. In: Lowe NJ, Shaath NA, eds. Sunscreens: Development,
Evaluation, and Regulatory Aspects. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1990:235–266.
UV Filters
321

=== Page 340 ===
30
Sun Protection and Sunscreens
Bernard Gabard
iderma Scientific Consulting, Basel, Switzerland
INTRODUCTION
Visible sunlight is only a tiny part of the whole radiation spectrum emitted by the sun
(400–700 nm). By increasing wavelength greater than 700 nm, one enters the invisible
radiation range called infrared radiation (IRR); by decreasing wavelength lesser than 400 nm,
one enters the ultraviolet radiation (UVR) domain. Overexposure to the sun’s invisible rays can
be harmful to human skin. The damage can be immediate with visible effects, such as erythema
and sunburn, leading to cell and tissue degradation. The damage can also be long term, and the
cumulative effects of prolonged exposure are now increasingly recognized to be the possible
cause of degenerative changes in the skin such as premature wrinkling and skin cancer. Indeed,
many skin changes that often are identified with aging actually result from damage by too much
sun exposure (1,2).
DEFINITIONS
The shorthand notations for wavelength ranges in the UVR and IRR defined by the
Commission Internationale de l’E´clairage (CIE) are closely related to the absorption depth of
radiation in tissue. UVR from both sunlight and artificial sources is subdivided into three
sections termed “UVA,” “UVB,” and “UVC” from the longer to shorter wavelengths: UVA
from 400 to 320 nm, UVB from 320 to 290 nm, and UVC less than 290 nm. The UVA section is
further divided in two subsections: UVA I (longer wavelengths 400–340 nm) and UVA II
(shorter wavelengths 340–320 nm). The longer the wavelength and the higher the number, the
deeper the UV penetrates the skin. The shorter the wavelength and the lower the number, the
greater the energy level of the light and the more damage it can do. UVC, e.g., is highly
efficient in causing sunburn and could destroy the skin but, fortunately, it is completely
absorbed by ozone in the highest part of the earth’s atmosphere. The sunlight’s UVR at the
surface of the earth is therefore constituted by variable proportions of UVB and UVA passing
right through the atmosphere, even on a cloudy day. This variability is due to different factors
such as latitude, height of the sun above horizon (time of the day), altitude, atmospheric
conditions, etc. As a rule, the amount of UVA reaching the earth’s surface may be considered
to be 10 to 30 times greater than that of UVB (3,4).
IRR is also subdivided into three sections termed “IRA,” “IRB,” and “IRC,” but from the
shorter to the longer wavelengths: IRA (or near-IR) from 780 to 1400 nm, IRB from 1400 nm to
3000 nm, and IRC from 3000 nm to 1 mm. Contrary to UVR, the longer the wavelength and the
higher the number, the less deep the IRR penetrates the tissue. Deep-penetrating IRA does not
cause any strong sensation of heat. But this is the case with the longer wavelengths IRB and
particularly IRC, which, at sufficiently high intensities, may damage or destroy the skin (2).
BASICS ON PROTECTION
Ultraviolet Radiation
Skin Effects of UVR
It has long been known that UVB is the principal cause of acute sunburn and tanning (4–6).
Therefore, sunscreen efficacy is predominantly directed against UVB radiations (the relative
contribution of UVA radiation to sunburn is considered to be only 15–24%). In addition,
exposure to UVB radiation is immunosuppressive, mutagenic, and carcinogenic.

=== Page 341 ===
Meanwhile, the importance of the biological effects of UVA has been recognized (5,6).
UVA induces significant photobiological reactions, mostly of indirect nature and requiring the
presence of oxygen, such as immediate and delayed tanning reactions and new melanin
formation. Importantly, there is now considerable evidence that UVA definitively contributes
to long-term degenerative changes of the skin such as significant connective tissue damage
(premature skin aging) and cancer formation, and may also contribute to UVB-induced
carcinogenesis (6,7).
UV Filters, Sunscreens, Photostability
Protection against the effects of UVR in the skin is achieved by specially designed molecules
(i.e., UV filters) incorporated in suitable formulations (sunscreens) such as creams or lotions,
oils, gels, sticks, etc. (8). However, in view of the growing photobiological knowledge about the
mechanisms of UVR-induced effects in the skin, this definition must now be revised to include
new concepts. Besides providing a minimum sunburn protection, modern sunscreens are now
required to provide a significant protection against UVA-induced effects (5,6). Further, they
may not only contain chemicals that absorb, reflect, or scatter UVR but also chemicals that
interfere with secondary reactions such as generation of free radicals and reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in the skin, generation of inflammatory mediators, photoexcitation of different
molecules, etc., and ultimately exert long-term protective effects on degenerative skin damage
(8). Consequently, non-UVR-absorbing, UVR-reflecting, or UVR-scattering molecules with a
pharmacological action in the skin may also be incorporated in sunscreens, endowing the
corresponding products with expanded properties (8–12).
UV filters used in cosmetic sunscreen formulations are roughly considered belonging to
two groups (13): organic molecules deliberately selected for their UVR-absorbing capacities
(i.e., organic UV filters) and particles that absorb, reflect, or scatter UVR. Particles may be
inorganic (i.e., metal oxides) or organic (microfine polymeric molecules) (8,13,14).
Both classes aim at preventing UVR from striking the skin. By absorbing UVR, UV filters
are transferred to an excited electronic state from where the energy may dissipate into
molecular vibrations (organic molecules) and into heat via collisions with surrounding
molecules. However, when an efficient dissipation of the absorbed energy is not possible
via, e.g., fluorescence, phosphorescence, heat, or internal conversion (isomerization) of an
organic molecule, the UV-filter may break and irreversibly change its chemical structure.
The molecule is not photostable. Consequently, the performance of the sunscreen may be
altered (8,15–17).
Free Radicals, Free Radical Scavengers, and Antioxidants
Photochemical reactions due to UVR are inextricably coupled with the chemistry of free
radicals. The photostability of UV filters is only one aspect of the reaction that may occur in
cosmetic products applied on sunlight-exposed skin. The role of ROS and, among these, of free
radicals has now been recognized as a possible cause of skin damage (4,7,18–20). Exposure of
the skin to the UVR leads to the generation of a multitude of ROS. These cause injury by
reacting with molecules such as lipids, proteins, nucleic acids; and by depleting the skin of
its natural endogenous antioxidant defenses, a condition now arises termed “oxidative stress”
(4,18,21). Thus, incorporation of molecules being able to control ROS in sunscreens should
be beneficial in terms of the so-called photodamage or actinic damage of the UV-exposed
skin.
Infrared Radiation
Skin Effects of IRR
Interest in investigating the effects of IRR on the skin is growing, and the current
understanding of the biological effects of IRR is evolving rapidly notwithstanding
controversies (22,23). IRR is inseparably linked to sunlight and perceived as heat. In the
skin, heat is implicated in erythema “ab igne” and elastotic degeneration, and may even be the
consequence of modern way of living (24).
Chronic exposure to IRR is growing because of the increased popularity of outdoor
activities combined with the lack of protection of sunscreens in the IRR range and increased
324
Gabard

=== Page 342 ===
use of IRR for wellness or therapeutic purposes, including promotion of healing of acute and
chronic wounds (22,23). Recent publications, however, have reported controversial results
concerning the biological effects of IRR in the skin. IRR, and particularly IRA, seems to be
involved in premature photoaging and also in photocarcinogenesis (2,22). On a molecular
basis, upregulation of endopeptidases in dermal fibroblasts [matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs)], which are responsible for the degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM),
seems to be at the origin of these deleterious effects. Induction of ROS is also involved. On the
other side, protective effects of IRR against UVB-induced changes have been reported, together
with a lack of upregulation of MMPs after IRA irradiation of dermal fibroblasts. The
mechanisms of this protection are not completely elucidated and seem to implicate ferritin
and/or heat shock proteins (5,22,23,25–29), although protection has also been observed
without the involvement of heat shock proteins (27,30,31). A general view of these results
points to temperature-induced protection against oxidative stress due to UV, a mechanism
that could represent a natural process of cell protection acquired and preserved through
evolution (23,27,28).
Protection Against IRR
In the past, some sunscreens claimed to protect against IRR (32). However, this has been
rapidly abandoned because of the lack of a proper investigation method and the obvious lack
of spectral absorption of UV filters in the IRR wavelength range. However, given the possible
protective effect of the IRR exposure against UVR damage, the question, nature, and mode of
IRR protection should be thoroughly investigated.
Nutritional protection using targeted micronutrients with ROS scavenging activities is one
such possibility. Several studies have already demonstrated that it is possible to modify some
properties of the skin (33,34) or reactions to sunlight by the administration of suitable nutritional
complements (35–37). Presently, nutritional protection against skin damage from sunlight is
increasingly advocated to the general public, but its effectiveness is controversial (35–37).
Investigation of an interaction (whatever direction) with IRA effects in the skin is presently only
possible by analyzing gene expression of key enzymes in skin biopsies (7,23,30,31). Clearly,
much more studies are presently needed about this controversial issue, which is not explicitly
addressed in the most recent regulatory monographs on sunscreens (5,6).
SPECIFIC LEGISLATION CONCERNING SUNSCREENS
Sunscreens are subject to specific regulations in almost every country of the world. In particular,
UV filters allowed to be used in sunscreens and their maximal concentrations are listed in
specific regulatory documents issued by the authorities. However, the spirit of the regulations
varies between countries. For example, in the United States, UV filters are considered as over-
the-counter drugs, and the monograph of the final over-the-counter sunscreen drug products
(6,38) issued by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) lies down conditions for the safety,
efficacy, and labeling of sunscreens. It went into effect in 2001. UVA labeling and testing was
deferred until 2007, and a proposal has now been recently released (6). In Europe, UV filters are
cosmetic ingredients and are regulated by the Cosmetic Directive last amended for the seventh
time in 2003 (39).
However, in every country, and notwithstanding a cosmetic status, sunscreens and the
basis on which their efficacy is being claimed are viewed as important public health issues. For
example, the European Commission has recently issued a recommendation on the efficacy of
sunscreen products and the claims made relating thereto, which sets out claims that should not
be made in relation to sunscreen products, precautions to be observed including application
instructions, and the minimum efficacy standard for sunscreen products to ensure a high level
of protection of public health (5). The same concerns are addressed in the proposed rules for
sunscreens, which were recently issued by the FDA (6).
Safety requirements for the registration of chemical UV filters are important and are
based on a stringent risk/benefit assessment (8,40). The safety dossier of a UV filter is
evaluated and approved by national and international health authorities such as the Scientific
Committee on Consumer Products (SCCP) in Europe and the FDA in the United States.
Sun Protection and Sunscreens
325

=== Page 343 ===
EVALUATION OF THE EFFICACY CLAIMS
Protection Against UVB: the Sun Protection Factor
The protective efficacy of a sunscreen against UVB is expressed as the sun protection factor
(SPF). This is universally accepted and acknowledged in the most recent regulatory issues
(5,6,38,41). The SPF is a number representing the ratio of the time required for a given
irradiation to produce minimal perceptible erythema (MED: minimum erythemal dose, the
UVR dose necessary to produce the minimal sunburn or minimal perceptible erythema 16–24
hours after exposure) in sunscreen-protected skin to the time required in unprotected skin. It
should be remembered that it is not a ratio of doses, as at each lecture the skin has received the
same dose (the MED). Only the irradiation times are different (38,41).
The SPF measurement method is now well established. Detailed guidelines concerning
the experimental procedure have been published in many different countries (6,38,41,42). The
SPF measurement methods may now be considered worldwide as close to harmonization,
although minor differences in the experimental design may subsist (43). The SPF value of a
given sunscreen is now considered to be the same within acceptable limits regardless of the
country where the product is sold.
Protection Against UVA
The situation is different concerning the evaluation of the protection afforded by a sunscreen in
the UVA range, because contrary to the measurement of the SPF, no universally accepted
method exists to evaluate UVA protection. However, most recent regulatory recommendations
or requirements consider the following methods for the evaluation of UVA protection of a
sunscreen (5,6,44):
l in vivo measurement of afforded protection with the persistent pigment darkening
method
l in vitro absorbance measurements
l in vitro determination of the critical wavelength
l in vitro determination of a UVA protection factor (UVAPF)
The requirements differ slightly between different regulatory authorities. The FDA has
proposed a two-step testing [in vivo persistent pigment darkening testing and in vitro the ratio
of long-wavelength UVA absorbance (UVA I) to the total UVR absorbance (UVB þ UVA)] (6).
In addition, if the products claim water resistance (WR), the UVA protection should be tested
after the appropriate period of water immersion. The European Union (EU) has recommended
the use of in vivo persistent pigment darkening test and the in vitro determination of the
critical wavelength (5). In addition, the EU clearly stated that in vitro testing methods
delivering equivalent results should be preferred, as in vivo methods raise ethical concerns. At
the time of writing, the testing methods referred to in the European recommendation are
subject to standardization by the European Committee for Standardization.
The determination methods are published and are freely available on the Internet. The
Colipa (the European cosmetic, toiletry and perfumery association) has recently issued a
detailed guideline on the in vitro determination of the UVAPF of sunscreen products, which
now may be used instead of the in vivo persistent pigmentation darkening method, thus
complying with the recommendations of the EU Commission (44).
Both the FDA proposed rules and the Colipa guidelines addressed on the photostability
issue and incorporation of a pre-irradiation step to the in vitro test method. Concerning the
pre-irradiation dose, the FDA proposes a dose of UVR corresponding to the SPF of the product,
but reduced by a factor of one-third to represent a reasonable exposure (6,43). The Colipa
method requires the determination of a UVAPF on a non-irradiated sample and then to irradiate
the product with a UVA dose of 1.2 J/cm2 multiplied by the UVAPF. The value of 1.2 J/cm2
results from a Colipa round robin test (44). The UVAPF determined after irradiation is the one
used to calculate the ratio of SPF to UVAPF, which should be less than 3 (5).
The Australian method was the first official method for evaluating the UVA protection of
a sunscreen (42). It is an in vitro method involving the determination of transmission values
between 320 and 360 nm (UVA II). This method was frequently used by sunscreen
manufacturers to claim UVA protection for their products at a time when no real alternative
326
Gabard

=== Page 344 ===
existed. However, because the Australian method takes no account of the long-wave UVA I, it
has not been considered by the EU for UVA protection claim of sunscreen products.
Protection Against IRR
There is presently no standard method to evaluate efficacy claims concerning IRR. This results
on one side from the current debate concerning the question if IRR effects on the skin are
deleterious, or not, and on the other side from the absence of defined criteria for measurements
of IRR effects in the skin, particularly concerning IRA.
Water and Sweat Resistance
WR characterizes the property of a sunscreen to maintain its degree of protection under
adverse conditions, such as repeated water immersion or sweating. Because of the outdoor use
of sunscreens in conditions where water immersion is usual and abundant sweating may be
encountered, water and sweat resistance is very important (45). Human testing is considered to
be the most acceptable and definitive method for claiming WR, and several guidelines have
been published for estimating the WR of a sunscreen (38,42,45).
FDA Guideline
A product is claimed to be “WR” if it retains the same category description after 40 minutes of
water immersion (2  20 time periods separated by a 20-minute rest period without toweling).
It may be claimed “very WR” if this is the case after four immersion periods of 20 minutes each
(80 minutes). The claim “waterproof” is no longer allowed. Products carrying the claims WR or
very WR may also claim to be “sweat resistant” because the FDA concluded that the
immersion test is a more severe test than a sweating test (45,46). It is now proposed that the
time spent in water (40 or 80 minutes) would be added on the product label to ensure frequent
reapplication (6).
Australian/New Zealand Guideline
The SPF of the sunscreen is determined after water immersion for not less than 40 minutes
(2  20 minutes’ time periods separated by a 5-minute rest period without toweling) (42). If
WR of greater than 40 minutes is to be tested, the schedule of alternating 20 minutes immersion
per 5 min rest is continued. The SPF measured after immersion determines the category
classification of the sunscreen. Any claim of WR is to be qualified by a statement of the time for
which the WR has been tested, up to the maximum claimed time. No statement is made about
sweat-resistance.
The Colipa Guideline
The Colipa guideline for testing WR was published recently (45). Contrary to the FDA and to
the Australian method, the SPF is determined on dry skin as usual before immersion. The
watering conditions are ensured by 2  20 minutes’ (40 minutes) immersion separated by a
15-minute drying period, which is very similar to the FDA requirements. The SPF is then
measured again after the immersion period and the so-called mean percentage water
resistance retention (%WRR) is calculated. The %WRR is the mean of the individual ratios:
½SPF ðwet skinÞ  1
½SPF ðdry skinÞ  1  100
A product may claim WR if the value for the 90% lower unilateral confidence limit of the %WRR
is greater than or equal to 50% and the 95% confidence interval on SPF (dry skin) was within 17%
of the mean SPF.
Finally, one must be aware that an important difference remains concerning the labeling
of the products: A water-resistant sunscreen in the United States or Australia is labeled with
the SPF measured after water exposition, whereas in Europe the SPF indicated is still the SPF
measured on dry skin.
Sun Protection and Sunscreens
327

=== Page 345 ===
SUN PROTECTION WITH NUTRITIONAL COMPLEMENTS
As already quoted, nutritional protection against skin damage from sunlight is increasingly
advocated to the general public. Several reasons are at the origin of these marketing
campaigns, besides the fact that the nutritional complement market is a fast-growing area with
a big development potential.
Recent results have been published showing that the mean yearly UVR exposition of the
skin amounts to 200 SED (standard erythemal dose) in Europe and to 250 SED in the United
States, and occurs during all-day life. Holiday exposition is shown to be only 30% and the
weekend exposure 40% (summer) and 20% (winter). The remaining 10% are the daily amount,
whereas children may be exposed to higher than 10% of the yearly SED (47–49). Therefore, up
to 70% of the yearly exposure is all-day exposure.
In addition, recent analyses have shown that 25% to 30% of the lifelong UVR exposition
occurs before 18 years of age (19,47,48). In this context, a systemic lifelong protection of the
whole body (and not only the treated areas) through oral administration of targeted
micronutrients makes sense and is considered by some experts as contributing to the general
public health (4,19,49).
However, the protection offered by the nutritional complements is difficult to assess. In
the majority of the published studies, it was measured using a standard MED determination as
practiced for the measurement of the SPF. All measured protection factors did not exceed 2.
The investigated micronutrients are more or less potent antioxidants and/or free radical
scavengers: vitamins or provitamins with antioxidative properties (carotenoids such as
b-carotene, vitamin A, vitamin C, and vitamin E), plant extracts enriched or containing
polyphenols as the most potent antioxidants known (polycopodium leucotomos, pycnogenol,
green tea extract), o-3 fatty acids, and trace elements such as selenium and zinc (5,19,33–37).
In view of these developments, the following points must be borne in mind:
l Protection measurements with the standard MED determination always showed
results around 2. This raises the question if this experimental approach is the right one.
But in any case, a thorough risk-benefit assessment must be conducted, as risks of
long-term administration of such micronutrients in high doses are not really
appreciated.
l Recent investigations have shown that a mixture of different micronutrients may show
a far better activity than each micronutrient administered alone (50). Therefore, some
people may face a huge amount of supplemented substances, depending on their way
of living. For b-carotene, it has been demonstrated that a category of persons is
definitively at risk if the amount administered is above a daily threshold (51).
l The current legislation concerning nutritional supplements is rapidly evolving, at least
in Europe.
CONCLUSION
The increasing awareness about the damaging effects of sunlight has led to a significant
demand for more protection from sunscreens and to an enlargement of the concept of sun
protection toward global photoprotection. A controversial issue is the enlargement of this
concept to the IRR wavelengths, as it is not entirely clear if IRA is damaging the skin or exerts a
protective effect against UVB damage.
The demand for more protection is clearly reflected by the steady increase in the SPF. The
SPF values of the majority of the sunscreens found in the market are now between 10 and 30,
compared with 2 and 8 at the end of the 1980s (52). Sunscreens with SPF greater than 50 are
now available. However, failure to use the sunscreen appropriately is a major concern and a
great educational effort is needed concerning the amount of product applied and the frequency
of use as consumers are still getting sunburned despite high-SPF sunscreens (51). This, and
recent results concerning the lifelong exposition to sunlight, has led some experts to advocate
systemic sun protection through administration of micronutrient supplements. This is still
another controversial issue, notwithstanding the missing risk-benefit analysis for this kind of
sun protection.
328
Gabard

=== Page 346 ===
Finally, the traditional “sunscreen” concept has been further enlarged to “photoprotection,”
including UVA radiation and its consequences as a general public health issue (5,6).
REFERENCES
1. Mu¨ller I. Sun and man: an ambivalent relationship in the history of medicine. In: Altmeyer P,
Hoffmann K, Stu¨cker M, eds. Skin Cancer and UV Radiation. Berlin: Springer, 1997:3–12.
2. Schroeter P, Schieke S, Morita A. Premature skin aging by infrared radiation, tobacco smoke and
ozone. In: Gilchrest B, Krutmann J, eds. Skin Aging. Berlin: Springer, 2006:45–53.
3. Diffey BL. Dosimetry of ultraviolet radiation: an update. In: Shaath N, ed. Sunscreens: Regulations
and Commercial Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:827–841.
4. Kullavanijaya P. Photoprotection. J Am Acad Dermatol 2005; 52:937–958.
5. Official Journal of the European Union: commission recommendation on the efficacy of sunscreen
products and the claims made relating thereto. L265/39, September 26, 2006.
6. U.S. FDA 21CFR Parts 347 and 352. Sunscreen drug products for over-the counter human use;
proposed amendment of final monograph. August 27, 2007.
7. Valencia A, Kochevar IE. Nox-1-based NADPH oxidase is the major source of UVA-induced reactive
oxygen species in human keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol 2008; 128:214–222.
8. Maier T, Korting HC. Sunscreens–which and what for? Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2005; 18:253–262.
9. Chaudhuri R. Role of antioxidants in sun care products. In: Shaath N, ed. Sunscreens: Regulations and
Commercial Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:604–638.
10. Elmets CA, Katiyar SK, Yusuf N. Photoprotection by gree tea polyphenols. In: Shaath N, ed. Sunscreens:
Regulations and Commercial Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:639–656.
11. Epstein H. Botanicals in sun care products. In: Shaath N, ed. Sunscreens: Regulations and Commercial
Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:657–671.
12. Lintner K. Antiaging actives in sunscreens. In: Shaath N, ed. Sunscreens: Regulations and Commercial
Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:673–695.
13. Shaath N. The chemistry of ultraviolet filters. In: Shaath N, ed. Sunscreens: Regulations and
Commercial Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:217–238.
14. Herzog B, Hueglin D, Osterwalder U. New sunscreen actives. In: Shaath N, ed. Sunscreens:
Regulations and Commercial Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:291–320.
15. Marrot L, Belaı¨di JP, Lejeune F, et al. Photostability of sunscreen products influences the efficiency of
protection with regard to UV-induced genotoxic or photoageing-related endpoints. Br J Dermatol
2004; 151:1234–1244.
16. Gonzalez H, Tarras-Wahlberg N, Stromdahl B, et al. Photostability of commercial sunscreens upon
sun exposure and irradiation by ultraviolet lamps. BMC Dermatol 2007; 7:1. Available at: http://
www.biomedcentral.com/1471-5945/7/1. Accessed February 2008.
17. Bonda C. Research pathways to photostable sunscreens. Cosmet & Toiletries 2008; 123(2):49–60.
18. Thiele J, Elsner P. Oxidants and antioxidants in cutaneous biology. Curr Problems Dermatol 2001; 29.
19. Swindells K, Rhodes LE. Influence of oral antioxidants on ultraviolet radiation-induced skin damage
in humans. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2004; 20:297–304.
20. Burke KE. Photodamage of the skin: protection and reversal with topical antioxidants. J Cosmet
Dermatol 2004; 3:149–155.
21. Darr D, Pinnell SR. Reactive oxygen species and antioxydant protection in photodermatology. In:
Lowe NJ, Shaath NA, Pathak MA. eds. Suncreens: development, Evaluation, and Regulatory Aspects.
2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1997:155–173.
22. Schieke S, Schroeder P, Krutmann J. Cutaneous effects of infrared radiation: from clinical observations
to molecular response mechanisms. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2003; 19:228–234.
23. Gebbers N, Hirt-Burri N, Scaletta C, et al. Water-filtered infrared-A radiation (wIRA) is not implicated
in cellular degeneration of human skin. GMS German Medical Science 2007; 5:1–14. Available at:
http://www.egms.de/pdf/gms/2007-5/000044.pdf. Accessed February 2008.
24. Bilic M, Adams BB. Erythema ab igne induced by a laptop computer. J Am Acad Dermatol 2004;
50:973–974.
25. Maytin EV, Wimberly JM, Kayne KS. Heat shock modulates UVB-induced cell death in human
epidermal keratinocytes: evidence for a hyperthermia-inducible protective response. J Invest
Dermatol 1994; 103:547–533.
26. Kayne KS, Maytin EV. Ultraviolet B-induced apoptosis of keratinocytes in murine skin is reduced by
mild local hyperthermia. J Invest Dermatol 1995; 104:62–67.
27. Menezes S, Coulomb B, Lebreton C, et al. Non-coherent near infrared radiation protects normal
human dermal fibroblasts from solar ultraviolet toxicity. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111:629–633.
28. Nakazawa K, Sahue F, Damour O, et al. Regulatory effects of heat on normal human melanocyte
growth and melanogenesis: comparative study with UVB. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 110:972–977.
Sun Protection and Sunscreens
329

=== Page 347 ===
29. Applegate LA, Scaletta C, Panizzon R, et al. Induction of the putative protective protein ferritin by
infrared radiation: implications in skin repair. Int J Mol Med 2000; 5:247–251.
30. Frank S, Oliver L, Lebreton-De Coster C, et al. Infrared radiation affects the mitochondrial pathway of
apoptosis in human fibroblasts. J Invest Dermatol 2004; 123:823–831.
31. Frank S, Menezes S, Lebreton-De Coster C, et al. Infrared radiation induces the p53 signaling
pathway: role in infrared prevention of ultraviolet B toxicity. Exp Dermatol 2006; 15:130–137.
32. Violin L, Girard F, Girard P, et al. Infrared photoprotection properties of cosmetic products:
correlation between measurement of the anti-erythemic effect in vivo in man and the infrared
reflection power in vitro. Int J Cosmet Sci 1994; 16:113–120.
33. Beguin A. A novel micronutrient supplement in skin aging: a randomized placebo-controlled double-
blind study. J Cosmet Dermatol 2005; 4:277–284.
34. Palombo P, Fabrizi G, Ruocco V, et al. Beneficial long-term effects of combined oral/topical
antioxidant treatment with the carotenoids lutein and zeaxanthin on human skin: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled study. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2007; 20:199–210.
35. Placzek M, Gaube S, Kerkmann U, et al. Ultraviolet B-induced damage in human epidermis is modified
by the antioxidants ascorbic acid and D-alpha-tocopherol. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 124:304–307.
36. McArdle F, Rhodes LE, Parslew RAG, et al. Effects of oral vitamin E and beta-carotene
supplementation on ultraviolet-radiation-induced oxidative stress in human skin. Am J Clin Nutr
2004; 80:1270–1275.
37. Stahl W, Heinrich U, Jungmann H, et al. Carotenoids and carotenoids plus vitamin E protect against
ultraviolet light-induced erythema in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 2000; 71:795–798.
38. U.S. FDA CFR 64(98) 27666–27693, May 21, 1999.
39. Council Directive 76/768/EEC, 1976L0768, September 19, 2007. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/
enterprise/cosmetics/html/consolidated_dir.htm. Accessed February 2008.
40. Nohynek GJ, Schaefer H. Benefit and risk of organic ultraviolet filters. Regulatory Toxicol Pharmacol
2001; 33:285–299.
41. COLIPA Guidelines: international sun protection factor (SPF) test method. COLIPA, B-1160 Auderghem,
Brussels, 2006. Available at: http://www.colipa.com/site/index.cfm?SID=15588&OBJ=28452&back=1
(accessed February 2008).
42. Australian/New Zealand Standard AS/NZS 2604:1998. Sunscreen products-evaluation and
classification.
43. Steinberg DC. The proposed amendment for sunscreen products in the United States, Cosmet &
Toiletries 2007; 122(12):42–52.
44. COLIPA Guidelines: method for the in vitro determination of UVA protection provided by sunscreen
products. 2007, COLIPA, B-1160 Auderghem – Brussels. Available at: http://www.colipa.com/site/
index.cfm?SID=15588&OBJ=28546&back=1. Accessed February 2008.
45. COLIPA Guideline for evaluating sun product water resistance. COLIPA, B-1160 Auderghem,
Brussels, 2005. Available at: http://www.colipa.com/site/index.cfm?SID=15588&OBJ=28522&-
back=1. Accessed February 2008.
46. Murphy EG. The final monograph. In: Shaath N, ed. Sunscreens: Regulations and Commercial
Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:95–115.
47. Diffey BL. Human exposure to ultraviolet radiation. J Cosmet Dermatol 2002; 1:124–130.
48. Thieden E, Philipsen PA, Heydenreich J, et al. UV radiation exposure related to age, sex, occupation
and sun behaviour based on time-stamped personal dosimeter readings. Arch Dermatol 2004;
140:197–203.
49. Sies H, Stahl W. Nutritional protection against skin damage from sunlight. Annu Rev Nutr 2004;
24:173–200.
50. Eberlein-Ko¨nig B, Ring J. Relevance of Vitamin C and E in cutaneous photoprotection. J Cosmet
Dermatol 2005; 4:4–9.
51. Touvier ME, Kesse E, Clavel-Cahpelon F, et al. Dual association of beta-carotene with risk of tobacco-
related cancers in a cohort of French women. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005; 97:1338–1344.
52. Diffey B. A perspective on the need for topical sunscreens. In: Shaath N. ed. Sunscreens: Regulations
and Commercial Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2005:45–53.
330
Gabard

=== Page 348 ===
31
After-Sun Products
Helena Karajiannis and Bernard Gabard
iderma Scientific Consulting, Basel, Switzerland
THE HISTORY BEHIND AFTER-SUN PRODUCTS
It was at the beginning of the 20th century when vigilance against significant sun exposure
(a relic of the 19th century) started to erode, and the roots of later attitudes toward sunbathing
were already manifested. The first clinical observations associating long-term sun exposure
with beneficial effects (phototherapy) as well as with skin cancer were also reported during
this time (1).
The role of sunlight as a major cause of skin cancer was increasingly mentioned in
popular magazines in the 1940s and 1950s. However, rapid growth of the sunscreen and later
of the after-sun industry has taken place, allowing sun tanning to remain popular (2). Sunburn
treatment and after-sun products were already used at the end of the 19th century. Examples
of such products are lactic acid with glycerine and rose water, hydrogen peroxide, iodine,
lemon or cucumber juice, and buttermilk baths (1).
AFTER-SUN-RELEVANT EFFECTS OF SUNLIGHT ON THE SKIN
Sunlight is highly energetic. Upon interaction with the skin, sunlight can be reflected,
scattered, or absorbed. To initiate a physical or chemical process, light needs to be absorbed by
an atom or molecule. Human skin is an abundant source of numerous chromophores with
strong absorption, particularly in the UVB, UVA, and blue visible region, e.g., porphyrin,
bilirubin 2, and pheomelanin (3).
Irradiation of the skin with ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is today known as a major cause
of skin cancer and of local and systemic immunosuppression and as a contributor of cutaneous
photoaging (4). Major changes concern all parts of the dermis and the dermal-epidermal
junction (5).
UVR is proved to produce DNA damage directly and indirectly through oxidative stress.
It provokes increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to local
inflammation and connective tissue degradation. Increased production of endopeptidases
such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) results in destruction of extracellular matrix (ECM).
Alterations of the ECM result in wrinkle formation with loss of moisture and elasticity,
increased skin fragility, and impaired wound healing (5). Furthermore, UVR induces synthesis
of various neuropeptides (substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide, propiomelanocortin,
etc.) leading to immunosuppression and photoaging (6). UVR supports additionally epidermal
thickening, reduced skin barrier function, and breakdown of tissue homeostasis (3).
Sunlight affects human skin not only via UVR but also via infrared radiation (IRR) and
the combination of them. IRR is perceived as heat. It has been observed that the temperature of
human skin measured inside the dermis increases to 408C to 438C within 15 to 20 minutes after
exposition to direct summer midday sunlight (7). Heat is one of the environmental factors that
amplify the effects of UVR mentioned above, reinforcing at the same time angiogenesis and
dehydration (7). The skin lipids may as well get thermally destroyed, leading to further
damage of the epidermal barrier. Additionally, thermal degradation of carbohydrates leads to
modified osmolar environment and further dehydration. Even if the skin does not seem to
have been affected by sun irradiation, increased transepidermal water loss (TEWL) is a fact
and irritation of nerve endings as well (8). Other climatic conditions can reinforce dehydration.
On the beach, wind is always blowing accelerating water evaporation from the skin. Because of
the cooling effect of the wind, heat perception is diminished or absent, and beachgoers may
consequently be staying longer in the sun without any discomfort. With increased evaporation,

=== Page 349 ===
the skin looses both moisture and the important water-soluble natural moisturizing substances
too. In this respect, particular attention should be paid to elderly sunbathers. It is known that
elderly skin is dry, exhibiting an overall dermal atrophy and reduced amounts of fibrillar
collagens and elastic fibers. Thus, prolonged sunbathing may worsen the already present skin
condition, leading to accelerated photoaging (9).
Under the influence of the sun, the human body increases sweat production. The horny
layers of the skin swell and loosen up, facilitating penetration of the radiation into the
epidermis. This may furthermore favor the effects described above (9).
Most of the effects described above are not immediately perceived by sunbathers. Rather
acute reactions to sunlight irradiation include erythema, edema followed by exfoliation,
tanning, and epidermal thickening, depending on exposure dose. Erythema appears 2 to
4 hours after irradiation, reaches its maximum by 24 to 48 hours, and then gradually
disappears (9). Pain, in the form of tenderness to touch, is usually delayed for several hours
after sun exposure (10).
The skin can manage the sunlight radiation stress only up to a limited grade of
irradiation. Sunscreen protection, although greatly limiting the effects of UVR in the skin, does
not completely protect against DNA damage. Small damage may be immediately restored, but
repair takes time. Therefore, a sufficient resting period, of at least 12 hours, should be taken
before going back to the sun (9).
SKIN CARE AFTER SUN EXPOSITION
Following intensive sun exposition, the skin needs appropriate care or treatment. Even after a
sunbath without any signs of erythema, an appropriate skin care is recommended. In case of
sunburn, treatment is necessary (8,9).
As a first step after every sun exposure, the skin should be washed with lukewarm water
to remove sweat and superficial mud particles. Thereafter, the skin should be treated in
accordance with the general schema of skin care: cleanse, vitalize, and maintain the status of
the skin.
For cleansing, surfactants showing little interaction with both skin lipids and skin
proteins are suitable. Products of pH, which are neutral for the skin, mildness enhancers, and
moisturizing agents such as lipids, occlusives, and humectants minimize aggressive
interactions with the epidermal barrier, thereby reducing skin damage (11). Recent clinical
testing on leading facial cleansers shows that non-foaming, emollient-based cleansers are
extremely mild to the skin while still being efficacious (12).
To vitalize and maintain the healthy status of the skin, appropriate skin care is most
important after sun exposition. Restoring the hydrolipidic skin barrier is mandatory (8).
Formulations containing moisturizers such as sodium lactate, urea, glycerine, panthenol, etc.,
are most suitable. Slightly occlusive water-in-oil formulations may further enhance the
moisturizing effect by impairing TEWL (13,14). However, they should be applied after first
cooling and calming the sun-irritated skin with an indicated oil-in-water formula (9,15). More
recently, use of skin-like physiologic lipids or naturally occurring lipid complexes of precursor
barrier lipids in the appropriate emulsion and molecular ratio has been shown to favorably
influence skin repair, barrier function, and moisturization (16,17).
AFTER-SUN PREPARATIONS AND THEIR ACTIVE INGREDIENTS
Most of the after-sun formulations are emulsions (lotions, creams, and sprays) or gels containing
moisturizers and actives known for their anti-inflammatory and antioxidative effects. Only
cosmetic, nondrug actives will be considered in this section. Thus, active ingredients are usually of
plant origin such as azulene or bisabolol (from chamomile), glycyrrhizin (from the root of
liquorice), hamamelis distillate (witch hazel), or extracts from aloe vera or chamomile. Further
compounds such as allantoin, panthenol, menthol, jojoba, collagen, silk amino acids, unsaturated
fatty acids, and fat-soluble vitamins such as retinol (vitamin A) and vitamin E are also found (9).
Formulations containing vasoconstrictive and/or tanning or astringent agents (tannins) are used to
alleviate heat and tension sensations due to erythema. However, owing to the potent astringent
332
Karajiannis and Gabard

=== Page 350 ===
effect (protein precipitation), use of such preparations on irregular pigmented skin or skin of
elderly people is not recommended. New developments have led to preparations facilitating or
supporting repair mechanisms (9). Recent studies demonstrated the effect of specific molecular
photoprotective agents. Prototype agents that antagonize, modulate, or reverse the chemistry of
skin photodamage hold promise in delivering therapeutic benefits (18–20).
In general, the active components used in after-sun preparations can be divided into
moisturizers, anti-inflammatory substances, antioxidants, and other ingredients.
Moisturizers
The name “moisturizer” is poorly defined and may be used to define the formula indented to
be applied to the skin or the ingredient(s) incorporated in the formulation (14,21). Moisturizing
substances are classical, well-known cosmetic ingredients used “to reduce the signs and
symptoms of dry, scaly skin” (21). Certainly, effective moisturizers are important components
of after-sun preparations for the reasons delineated previously. There is a huge amount of
literature available on different moisturizers and their mechanisms of action, thus the reader is
referred to very recent pertinent monographs (22–24) and to chapter 10 of this book.
Anti-Inflammatory Substances
Ingredients such as dexpanthenol, azulene, glycyrrhetinic acid, bisabolol, allantoin are
incorporated into after-sun formulations to relieve erythema and its symptoms of pain,
redness, and burning. The effects of these substances are generally weak. For example,
dexpanthenol was shown to alleviate dry, inflamed skin in an experimental model of skin
irritation due to repetitive washing. It improved stratum corneum hydration, stabilized the
epidermal barrier function, and showed an anti-inflammatory effect (25–27). The combination
of skin hydrating and anti-inflammatory properties in the same molecule is of course very
interesting for after-sun preparations.
However, more powerful are the tanning or astringent agents. They alleviate itch and
possess a local anesthetic effect (9).
Hamamelis (Witch Hazel)
For a long time hamamelis (witch hazel) has been used in the natural medicine. In United
States, hamamelis is approved as an over-the-counter astringent in the external analgesic (pain
relieving) and skin-protecting categories. In Germany, hamamelis extract–containing prepa-
rations are approved among others for the treatment of minor skin injuries and local skin
inflammation. Extracts from the leaves or from the bark, but also flower distillate, are mainly
used. Main components of the distillate are tanning agents as well as flavonoids and essential
oils. Gallotannine and proanthocyanidine act constrictive at the outer membranes of the skin
(28,29). Flavonoids are known for their anti-inflammatory effects on the skin (30). In several
studies, the anti-inflammatory and erythema-suppressing effect of hamamelis has been
demonstrated (27,31–33), even if lower than the one of hydrocortisone-containing formulations
(31). However, the efficacy of the hamamelis distillate lotions has been shown to be similar to
an antihistamine gel containing 0.1% dimethindene maleate. The low toxicity of hamamelis
and the absence of known undesirable effects underline its favorable risk-benefit ratio
supporting thus its usage in after-sun formulations.
Polyhydroxy Acids
Polyhydroxy acids (PHAs) are a special type of AHAs (a-hydroxyl acids) known to modulate
keratinization, normalize stratum corneum exfoliation and thickness, and condition the barrier
integrity due to the effects mediated by the a-hydroxy group. In addition, PHAs have been
found to be less irritating to the skin than traditional AHAs mainly due to their larger size (34).
For this reason, PHAs offer a distinct advantage over conventional AHAs (glycolic acid and
lactic acid) when used on sensitive or irritated skin. In addition to the fact that many PHAs are
strong humectants, several PHAs including gluconolactone, lactobionic acid, and glucohepto-
nolactone have also been shown to function as antioxidants. Through chelating of oxidation-
promoting metals, PHAs may prove beneficial in protecting the skin from UVR-induced
damage (35).
After-Sun Products
333

=== Page 351 ===
Cooling Compounds
Menthol and related “cooling agents” such as camphor, alcohol, and other compounds are
widely used in cosmetics and particularly in after-sun products. The cooling and carminative
actions of menthol have been repeatedly shown (36–39). Green (37) demonstrated that menthol
intensified paradoxical cutaneous sensations. In the study of Yosipovitch et al. (39), menthol
had a subjective cooling effect lasting up to 70 minutes in most of the volunteers. However, it
did not affect cold and heat pain threshold. Recently, Green and Schoen (40) found that
dynamic contact can suppress steady-state cold sensations from menthol, proving the bimodal
action of menthol.
Alcohol induces an immediate short cold sensation and lowers the threshold of cold
sensation. This is mainly due to its rapid evaporation.
Thus, incorporation of cooling agents such as menthol or alcohol in after-sun
preparations is meaningful, as they soothe and alleviate the sensations of warmth and
tenseness of sun-irritated skin, at least for a short time. This clearly improves their cosmetic
acceptance.
Antioxidants
The cutaneous antioxidant defense system is complex, multilayered, and far from being
completely understood. The human skin contains various antioxidants such as lipophilic ones
[vitamin E with its active components tocopherol and tocotrienol, ubiquinones (coenzyme
Q10), carotenoids, and vitamin A] as well as hydrophilic ones (vitamin C, uric acid, and
glutathione) and enzymatic antioxidants (catalase, etc.) (41,42). Being the most environ-
mentally exposed skin layer, the stratum corneum may particularly benefit from an increased
antioxidant capacity due to topical supplementation as shown in the example of vitamin E
(43,44).
While efficacy of topical antioxidant application before UVR is demonstrated in several
studies (35), the effect of these agents after irritation is less obvious (44,45). Hence, use of
antioxidants in after-sun preparations aims at replenishing the depleted antioxidant pool and/
or at boosting or reinforcing the antioxidant defenses of the horny layer and not necessarily at a
direct effect on sun-exposed skin. For this purpose, substances such as vitamins of the A, C,
and E series, ubiquinones (coenzyme Q10), and/or plant polyphenols from green tea
(catechins), vine (resveratrol), pomegranate (anthocyanidins and hydrolizable tannins) or
soybeans (genistein) are now incorporated in many after-sun preparations (46).
Green tea extract is particularly interesting in this respect because several studies
are available regarding photoprotection and anti-inflammatory activities after topical appli-
cation. A protection against UVA has also been demonstrated (47–49). The principal
chemical constituents of green tea are polyphenols containing () epigalocatechin (EGC),
() epicatechin (EC), () epicatechin-3-gallate (ECG), and () epigalocatechin gallate (EGCG).
Topical EGCG has been shown to reduce UV-carcinogenesis in mice (50–52). Furthermore,
recent studies suggest that green tea polyphenols mediate almost probably their UV-protective
effects via induction of DNA repair (53).
Other Ingredients
Shea Butter
Shea butter may be incorporated in the lipid fraction of after-sun formulations. Shea butter
contains a highly unsaponifiable fraction consisting of terpenic alcohols and sterols found
almost exclusively as cinnamic acid esters. They give shea butter its known healing properties,
e.g., the elimination of superficial irritation and erythema. The unsaponifiables also contain 5%
to 10% phytosterols, which are known to activate cellular growth stimulation. Moreover, shea
butter contains the potent antioxidant butylated hydroxytoluene as well as various catechin
compounds (54). Shea butter is a nontoxic and nonirritating material. It has a highly
unsaturated glyceridic fraction, which makes it useful as UV screen. It also contains linoleic
acid (55).
Clinical studies were performed with shea butter showing protecting, regenerating,
wound-healing, and wrinkle-reducing effects (56). It has moisturizing, soothing, antiage-
ing, and anti-inflammatory properties and contributes to an efficient release of active
ingredients (56).
334
Karajiannis and Gabard

=== Page 352 ===
Olive Oil
Extra virgin olive oil (EVOO), which is obtained from whole fruit, is rich in phenolic compounds
having potent anti-ROS activity. Recently, it has been found that EVOO painted on mouse skin
immediately after UVB radiation, significantly retarded the onset and reduced the number of skin
cancer and ROS-induced DNA damage. Interestingly, pretreatment with EVOO and pre- or
posttreatment with regular olive oil neither retarded nor reduced skin cancer in UV-irradiated
mice. Of the olive oil components tested, oleuropein has been found to reduce ROS-induced skin
damage (57). These results strongly suggest that topical use of olive oil after sun bathing in
humans may prevent skin cancer formation by reducing ROS-induced DNA damage. However,
further human studies are needed to support recommendations in the public.
Molecular Photoprotective Agents
On the basis of the causative involvement of skin chromophores in skin photodamage, it is to
be expected that molecular antagonism of photoexcited states offers a potential therapeutic
opportunity for skin photoprotection. Reactivity-based approaches are widely followed for the
design of photoprotective agents, including FDA-approved drugs, cosmeceuticals, and
experimental therapeutics in preclinical development.
Two classes of reactivity-based agents for skin photoprotection can be distinguished on
the basis of their mechanism of action: direct antagonists of photooxidative stress (sunscreens,
quenchers of photoexcited states, antioxidants, redox modulators, and glycation inhibitors)
and skin photo-adaptation inducers [nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) activators,
heat-shock response inducers, and metallothionein inducers] (20). Of the first class, quenchers
are worth to be mentioned more explicitly as many of them are allowed to be used in
cosmetics.
Quenchers are compounds capable of inactivating photoexcited states by direct chemical
and/or physical interactions. Physical quenchers that can undergo repetitive cycles of excited
state quenching without chemical depletion or the need of metabolic regeneration represent a
very attractive class of compounds. Examples of such quenchers are vitamin E, ascorbate,
L-proline, L-proline methylester, carotenoids (lycopene, lutein, and zeaxanthin), the microbial
osmoprotectant ectoine, etc. (20). Ectoine, which can be used, as well as a strong moisturizer is
already included in various kinds of marketed products (58,59).
Two further molecular photoprotective concepts are worth to be mentioned.
Few studies demonstrated that when exogenously applied, the bacterial DNA incision
repair enzyme T4 endonuclease V (T4N5) is able to protect human skin in vivo from
UVR-induced DNA damage. Although neither erythemal response nor microscopic
sunburn cell formation were influenced by T4N5 treatment, UVR-induced upregulation of
interleukin 10 and tumor necrosis factor-a were prevented (19). Interestingly, the liposomal
lotion was applied after irradiation, thus as an after-sun product would be. A further
experiment in xeroderma pigmentosum patients showed that the T4N5 enzyme clearly
lowered the annualized rate of new lesions in these patients with defects in their DNA repair
mechanisms. An interesting and perhaps fundamental finding was that the rate of new actinic
keratoses and basal cell carcinomas did not increase during the six months of follow-up after
discontinuation of treatment (60). This may imply that T4N5 treatment reverses a fundamental
and common source of these neoplasms and is not just a cosmetic treatment (61).
The second approach is similar to the first one but uses a different DNA repair enzyme.
Photolyases are repair enzymes found in fish or prokaryotic organism and normally not
present in human skin. They bind to cyclobutan-pyrimidine dimers after their formation due
to UVR exposure. The complex enzyme plus dimer is activated by light in the range of 300 to
500 nm, and the repair process gets induced. Here too, the photolyase from the blue algae
Anacystis nidulans prepared from genetically engineered Escherichia coli was packed in
liposomes and applied topically after irradiation. After a new irradiation with activating light
of 365 nm, a reduction of 40% to 45% of the cyclobutan-pyrimidine dimers was noted.
Similarly, a clear effect on immunosuppression was seen and on the expression of the pro-
inflammatory ICAM-1, which was clearly decreased by UVR, but the decrease was
antagonized by topical enzyme treatment (18).
Topical application of molecular photoprotective agents is a very promising approach to
skin cancer prevention and totally compatible with the principle of after-sun products. Thus, one
After-Sun Products
335

=== Page 353 ===
may think of a pre-sun preparation combining antioxidants to replete the horny layer with the
T4N5 enzyme to prevent formation of cyclobutan-pyrimidine dimers. Then, an after-sun
preparation could provide moisturization and skin care, including photolyase to repair the last
DNA changes. A liposomal lotion containing photolyase is already on the market in Germany (62).
CONCLUSIONS
Appropriate after-sun skin care is necessary to support the natural regeneration process of
sun-irritated skin. Mild cleansing, cooling, moisturizing, and caring of the skin belong to the
basis of a good after-sun treatment. In the last years, a lot of research has been successfully
conducted to find ways to inhibit or repair sun-induced skin damage and to prevent skin
cancer. Of the investigated compounds, antioxidants and molecular photoprotective agents
seem to be the most promising for future application in after-sun products. However, ingredients
with dual action showing UV filter properties as well as repair properties are certainly a
valuable alternative. Recent studies have shown that topical caffeine as well as caffeine benzoate
application induces apoptosis, thus decreasing the probability of neoplasmic transformation–
irradiated cells, whereas having at the same time a sunscreen effect (63).
REFERENCES
1. Albert MR, Ostheimer KG. The evolution of current medical and popular attitudes towards ultraviolet
exposure: part 1. J Am Acad Dermatol 2002; 47:930–937.
2. Albert MR, Ostheimer KG. The evolution of current medical and popular attitudes towards ultraviolet
exposure: part 2. J Am Acad Dermatol 2003; 49:1096–1106.
3. Wondrak GT, Jacobson MK, Jacobson EL. Endogenous UV-photosensitizers: mediators of skin
photodamage and novel targets for skin photoprotection. Photodermal & Photobiol Sci 2006; 5:215–237.
4. Gallagher RP, Spinelli JJ, Lee TK. Tanning beds, sunlamps and risk of cutaneous malignant
melanoma. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005; 14(3):562–566.
5. Tsoureli-Nikita E, Watson REB, Griffiths CEM. Photoageing: the darker side of the sun. Photochem
Photobiol Sci 2006; 5:106–164.
6. Legat FJ, Wolf P. Photodamage to the cutaneous sensory nerves: role in photoaging and
carcinogenesis of the skin? Photochem Photobiol Sci 2006; 5:170–176.
7. Seo JY, Chung JH. Thermal aging: a new concept of skin aging. J Dermatol Sci 2006; (suppl 2):S13–S22.
8. Proksch E, Jensen JM, Crichton-Smith A, et al. Rationale Behandlung von Patienten mit
Verbrennungen 1. Grades, Hautarzt 2007; 58:604–610.
9. Kindl G, Raab W. Licht und Haut-Bra¨unung, Lichtschutz, Pflege: Ein Leitfaden fu¨r die Beratung in
der Praxis. 4th ed. Eschborn: Govi-Verlag Pharmazeutischer Verlag GmbH, 1998.
10. Johnson RM, Richard R. Partial thickness burns: identification and management. Adv Skin Wound
Care 2003; 16(4):178–189.
11. Ananthapadmanabhan KP, Moor DJ, Subramanyan K, et al. Cleansing without compromise: the
impact of cleansers on the skin barrier and the technology of mild cleansing. Dermatol Ther 2004;
17:16–25.
12. Abbas S, Weiss Golberg S, Massaro M. Personal cleanser technology and clinical performance.
Dermatol Ther 2004; 17:35–42.
13. Chardon A. Solar simulators and sunlight. Nouv Dermatol 1998; 17:330–335.
14. Gabard B. Testing the efficacy of moisturizers. In: Fluhr J, Elsner P, Berardesca E, et al., eds.
Bioengineering of the Skin: Water and the Stratum Corneum. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press,
2005:211–236.
15. Daniels R, Knie U. Galenics of dermal products-vehicles, properties and drug release. J Dtsch
Dermatol Ges 2007; 5:367–383.
16. Halkier-Sørensen L. Efficacy of skin care products and different mixtures of lipids on barrier function.
In: Gabard B, Elsner P, Surber C, et al., eds. Dermatopharmacology of Topical Preparations—A
Product Development-Oriented Approach. Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 1999:329–363.
17. Thornfeldt C. Critical and optimal molar ratios of key lipids. In: Lode´n M, Maibach HI, eds. Dry Skin
and Moisturizers—Chemistry and Function. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 2000:337–347.
18. Stege H, Roza L, Vink AA, et al. Enzyme plus light therapy to repair DNA damage in ultraviolet-B-
irradiated human skin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 97:1790–1795.
336
Karajiannis and Gabard

=== Page 354 ===
19. Wolf P, Maier H, Mu¨lleger RR, et al. Topical treatment with liposomes containing T4 endonuclease V
protects human skin in vivo from upregulation of interleukin-10 and tumor necrosis factor-a. J Invest
Dermatol 2000; 114:149–156.
20. Wondrak GT. Let the sun shine in: mechanisms and potential for therapeutics in skin photodamage.
Curr Opin Investig Drugs 2007; 8(5):390–400.
21. Kligman A. Introduction. In: Lode´n M, Maibach HI, eds. Dry Skin and Moisturizers—Chemistry and
Function. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 2000:3–9.
22. Lode´n M. Hydrating substances. In: Barel AO, Paye P, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic
Science and Technology. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 2001:347–360.
23. Lode´n M, Maibach HI. Dry skin and moisturizers-chemistry and function. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC
Press, 2000.
24. Rawlings AV, Harding CR. Moisturization and skin barrier function. Dermatol Ther 2004; 17:43–48.
25. Gehring W, Gloor M. Effect of topically applied dexpanthenol on epidermal barrier function and
stratum corneum hydration. Drug Res 2000; 50:659–663.
26. Gehring W, Gloor M. Der repetitive Waschtest als Modell zur beurteilung von Hautschutzpra¨paraten
am Beispiel einer dexpanthenolhaltigen Formulierung. Akt Dermatol 2001; 27:279–284.
27. Wolff HH, Kieser M. Hamamelis in children with skin disorders and skin injuries: results of an
observational study. Eur J Pediatr 2007; 166:943–948.
28. Dirr RJ. Hamamelis und andere Zaubernussgewa¨chse. Stuttgart: Eugen Ulmer, 1994.
29. Wolters B. Agave bis Zaubernuss. Heilpflanzen der Indianer Nord- und Mittelamerikas. Greifenberg:
Urs Freund Verlag, 1996.
30. Weber SU, Saliou C, Packer L, et al. Antioxidants. In: Barel AO, Paye P, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of
Cosmetic Science and Technology. New York Basel: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 2001:299–310.
31. Hughes-Formella BJ, Bohnsack K, Rippke F, et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of Hamamelis lotion in a
UVB erythema test. Dermatol 1998; 196:316–322.
32. Rippke F, Filbry A, Gassmueller J. Nachweis der entzu¨ndungslindernden Wirksamkeit hamamelisdestillat-
haltiger Formulierungen im modifizierten UV-Erythem-Test. Euro Cosmetics 1999; 11(12–99):26–27.
33. Hughes-Formella BJ, Fibry A, Gassmueller J, et al. Anti-inflammatory efficacy of topical preparations
with 10% Hamamelis distillate in a UV erythema test. Skin Pharmacol Appl Physiol 2002; 15:125–132.
34. Grimes PE, Green BA, Wildnauer RH, et al. The use of polyhydroxy acids (PHAs) in photoaged skin.
Cutis 2004; 73(suppl 2):3–13.
35. Bernstein EF, Brown DB, Schwartz MD, et al. The polyhydroxy acid gluconolactone protects against
ultraviolet radiation in an in vitro model of cutaneous photoageing. Dermatol Surg 2004; 30(2):189–196.
36. Eccles R. Menthol and related cooling compounds. J Pharm Pharmacol 1994; 46:618–630.
37. Green BG. The sensory effects of 1-menthol on human skin. Somatosens Mot Res 1992; 9:235–244.
38. Green BG. Menthol inhibits the perception of warmth. Physiol Behav 1986; 38:833–838.
39. Yosipovitch G, Szolar C, Hui XY, et al. Effect of topically applied menthol on thermal, pain and itch
sensations and biophysical properties of the skin. Arch Dermatol Res 1996; 288:245–248.
40. Green BG, Schoen KL. Thermal and nociceptive sensations from menthol and their suppression by
dynamic contact. Behav Brain Res 2007; 176(2):284–291.
41. Thiele JJ, Dreher F, Packer L. Antioxidant defense systems in skin. In: Elsner P, Maibach H, Rougier A,
eds. Drugs vs Cosmetics: Cosmeceuticals? New York: Marcel Dekker, 2000:145–188.
42. Thiele JJ, Schroeter C, Hsieh SN, et al. The antioxidant network of the stratum corneum. In: Thiele JJ,
Elsner P, eds. Current Problems in Dermatology. Oxidants and Antioxidants in Cutaneous Biology.
Vol. 29. Basel: Karger, 2001; 29:26–42.
43. Wester RC, Maibach HI. Absorption of tocopherol into and through human skin. Cosmet Toiletr 1997;
112:53–57.
44. Dreher F, Maibach HI. Protective effects of topical antioxidants in humans. In: Thiele JJ, Elsner P, eds.
Current Problems in Dermatology. Oxidants and Antioxidants in Cutaneous Biology. Vol. 29. Basel:
Karger, 2001; 29:157–164.
45. Zhai H, Behnam S, Villarama CD, et al. Evaluation of the antioxidant capacity and preventive effects
of a topical emulsion and its vehicle control on the skin response to UV-exposure. Skin Pharmacol
Physiol 2005; 18(6):288–293.
46. Humbert P, Haftek M, Creidi P, et al. Topical ascorbic acid on photoaged skin. Clinical, topographical
and ultrastructural evaluation: double-blind study vs. placebo. Exp Dermatol 2003; 12:237–244.
47. Elmets CA, Singh D, Tubesing K, et al. Cutaneous photoprotection from ultraviolet injury by green tea
polyphenols. J Am Acad Derm 2001; 44:425–432.
48. Ahmad N, Mukhtar H. Cutaneous photochemoprotection by green tea: a brief review. Skin Pharmacol
Appl Skin Physiol 2001; 14:69–76.
49. Katiyar SK, Elmets CA. Green tea polyphenolic antioxidants and skin photoprotection (Review). Int J
Oncol 2001; 18:1307–1313.
50. Haliday GM. Inflammation, gene mutation and photoimmunsuppression in response to UVR-
induced oxidative damage contributes to photocarcinogenesis. Mutat Res 2005; 571:107–120.
After-Sun Products
337

=== Page 355 ===
51. Mukhtar AF. Botanical antioxidants n the prevention of photocarcinogenesis and photoaging, Exp
Dermatol 2006; 15:678–684.
52. Yusuf N, Irby C, Katiyar SK, et al. Photoprotective effects of green tea polyphenols. Photodermatol
Photoimmunol Photomed 2007; 23:48–56.
53. Schwarz A, Maeda A, Gan D, et al. Green tea phenol extracts reduce UVB-induced DNA damage in
human cells via interleukin-12. Photochem Photobiol, 2008. Epub 2008 Jan 7.
54. Maranz S, Wiesman Z, Garti N. Phenolic constituents of Shea (Vitellaria paradoxa) Kernels. J Agric
Food Chem 2003; 51(21):6268–6273.
55. Lipex Shea Butter. Abstract from Lipex Lipid Experience.
56. Pobeda M, Sousselier L. Shea butter: the revival of an African Wonder. Global Cosmet Ind 1999;
(4):36–41.
57. Ichihaski M, Veda M, Budiyanto A, et al. UV-induced skin damage. Toxicol 2003; 189:21–39.
58. SANHELIOS Derma-Dilin1 Product Information. Bremen, Germany: Boerner GmBH.
59. Merck Germany Product Leaflet. Available at: http://abonnieren.merck.de/servlet/PB/show/
1357060/Merck_Chemie_Foschung_3_de.pdf. Accessed January 2008.
60. Yarosh D, Klein J, O’Connor A, et al. Effect of topically applied T4 endonuclease V in liposomes on
skin cancer in xeroderma pigmentosum: a randomized study. Lancet 2001; 357:926–929.
61. Yarosh DB. Liposomes in investigative dermatology. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2001;
17:203–212.
62. STADA OTC Arzneimittel GmbH, Technical information. Available at: http://www.ladival.de/p_bd.asp.
Accessed January 2008.
63. Lu Y-P, Lou Y-R, Xie J-G, et al. Caffeine and caffeine sodium benzoate have a sunscreen effect,
enhance UVB-induced apoptosis, and inhibit UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis in SKH-1 mice.
Carcinogenesis 2007; 28(1):199–206.
338
Karajiannis and Gabard

=== Page 356 ===
32
Skin Care Products: Artificial Tanning
Stanley B. Levy
Department of Dermatology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, and Revlon
Research Center, Edison, New Jersey, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
The desire for a tanned appearance along with increasing awareness of the hazards of
ultraviolet (UV) light exposure has generated a renewed interest in artificial tanning products.
Better formulations of sunless or self-tanners with improved aesthetics are more widely
available. As consumer experience with the newer products has grown, this category has
become more popular, and there has been an increasing proportion of overall sun care sales.
Over 20% of young adults in both United States and Australia reported using these products in
the preceding year (1,2). Individual users were also more likely to have sunburned consistent
with higher use of these products in fairer Caucasians. In other studies, exclusive users of
sunless tanners were more likely to practice overall sun protection (3,4) and decrease their use
of tanning beds (5).
Dihydroxyacetone (DHA) is the active ingredient in sunless or self-tanners, and is
responsible for darkening the skin by staining. DHA is classified in the International Cosmetic
Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook (6) as a colorant or a colorless dye. Other agents with the
potential to enhance skin pigmentation, including tan accelerators containing tyrosine and
other ingredients. Tanning promoters containing psoralens, which require UV exposure, will
not be discussed here (7).
HISTORY
The first mention of DHA as an active ingredient in medicine appeared in the 1920s, when it was
proposed as a substitute for glucose in diabetics. In the 1950s, the oral administration of DHA
was restudied as a diagnostic procedure for glycogen storage disease when it was given in large
doses orally (8). When the children spit up this sweet concentrated material, the skin became
pigmented in areas splattered on the skin, without staining clothing. Aqueous solutions were
then applied to the skin directly, and the pigmentation reproduced (9). In the late 1950s, cosmetic
tanning preparations first appeared in the marketplace. Cosmetic acceptance of these initial
products was limited because of the uneven orange-brown color they imparted to the skin. With
the availability of improved formulations in the 1990s, sales of sunless tanners grew exponentially
as a total proportion of sun care product sales. In the last several years, operator-assisted spray
tans using DHA have become popular in spas and salons.
CHEMISTRY
DHA (C3H6O3) is a white, crystalline hygroscopic powder. This 3-carbon sugar forms a
dimer in freshly prepared aqueous solution (Fig. 1). With heating to effect a solution in
alcohol, ether, or acetone, it reverts to the monomer. The monomeric form is less stable, but
more important in the browning reaction, which leads to the skin color change (10). DHA is
stable between pH 4 and 6, but above pH 7, efficacy is lost with the formation of brown-
colored compounds. A buffered mixture at pH 5 is most stable. Heating above 388C for long
periods of time will also affect stability. DHA needs to be stored in a cool, dry place, ideally
48C and low atmospheric humidity (11). Glyceraldehyde, the isomer of DHA, is also present
in the solution. Glyceraldehyde may degrade into formaldehyde and formic acid. In acidic
solution (pH 4), this isomerization and therefore these latter undesirable ingredients are
minimized.

=== Page 357 ===
The Maillard or browning reaction has been defined as the reaction of an amino group of
amino acids, peptides, or proteins with the glycosidic hydroxyl group of sugars. DHA in the
context of this reaction may be considered a 3-carbon sugar, reacting with free amino groups
available as amino acids, peptides, and proteins supplied by the keratin to form products or
chromophores referred to as melanoidins (12). Melanoidins have some physicochemical
properties similar to naturally occurring melanin (13). Electron spin resonance has recently
shown that free radicals are produced in vivo by the Maillard reaction (14).
FORMULATION
The concentration range of DHA in self-tanning products can range from 2.5% to 10%, with the
usual concentration being 5% (10). Lower concentration products allow the consumer greater
latitude with application since they tend to be more “forgiving” of uneven application or
rough surfaces. Labeling products as light, medium, or dark can be particularly helpful with
the depth of shade a function of the DHA concentration.
DHA is predominantly formulated in oil-in-water emulsions. Formulating with silicones
allows the formulator to obtain the spreadability of oils, which potentially reduces streakiness
with application to the skin. Minimizing particle size of the micelles in the emulsion chosen
also improves uniformity of spreading the formulation on the skin surface. On the basis of the
chemistry of DHA, formulations should be buffered to an acidic pH (4 to 5) and not heated in
manufacturing to temperatures higher than 408C.
After incorporation of DHA into a formulation, the pH may drop during storage, suggesting
that stability may actually be increased when the pH is kept between 3 and 4 (15). The use of
nonionic emulsifiers as opposed to ionic emulsifiers may also improve stability. Some thickeners
such as carbomers, sodium carboxymethylcellulose, and magnesium aluminum silicate can cause
rapid degradation of DHA. Hydroxyethylcellulose, methylcellulose, and silica as well as xanthan
gum and polyquaternium-10 for thickening DHA-containing emulsions are better choices.
DHA can react with oxygen and nitrogen-containing compounds, collagen, urea derivatives,
amino acids, and proteins. They should be avoided in the formulation of the DHA-containing
vehicle. Non-nitrogen-containing sunscreen should be used if sun protection is desired. Attempts
have been made to take advantage of this effect by adding amino acids to speed up the skin-
darkening process, but with less substantive color results. Methionine sulfoxide, a sulfur-
containing amino acid, has been used as an excipient applied before the application of the DHA-
containing cream (16). Two compartment systems have been patented on the basis of this reaction.
As with moisturizing products in general, lotions are more readily accepted by consumers
than are creams with ease of spreadability and aesthetics. Creams can produce a more intense
tan owing to greater applied film thickness. Products may be formulated for dry-skin types by
the addition of emollients and humectants. Products formulated in gel or alcoholic vehicles may
be more suitable for oily skin. Newer vehicles include sprays, foams, mousses, and wipes.
MECHANISM OF ACTION
The site of action of DHA is the stratum corneum (17). Tape stripping of the skin quickly
removes the color (18), as does mechanical rubbing. Deeper staining in areas with thicker
stratum corneum and no staining of mucous membranes without a stratum corneum are also
Figure 1
Chemical structure of DHA. Abbreviation: DHA, dihydrox-
yacetone.
340
Levy

=== Page 358 ===
consistent with this being the site of action. DHA may be used as a substitute for
dansylchloride as a measure of stratum corneum turnover time (19,20). Microscopic studies
of stripped stratum corneum and hair reveal irregular pigment masses in the keratin layers
(21) consistent with melanoidins. These melanoidins are formed via the Maillard reaction with
DHA as a sugar reacting with the amino groups supplied by the keratin.
APPLICATION
Following application of a typical DHA-containing self-tanning lotion, color change may be
observed within an hour (22). This color change may be seen under Wood’s light (black light)
within 20 minutes. Maximal darkening may take 8 to 24 hours to develop. Individuals can
make several successive applications every few hours to achieve their desired color. Color may
last as long as five to seven days with a single application. Depending on anatomical
application, the same color can be maintained with repeat applications every one to four days.
The face requires fewer applications but more frequent reapplication to maintain the color than
the extremities. Depth of color varies with the thickness and compactness of the stratum
corneum. Palms and soles stain deepest, necessitating washing of hands after application to
avoid staining. Hair and nails will color but not mucous membranes lacking a stratum
corneum or keratin layer. Rougher hyperkeratotic skin over the knees, elbows, and ankles will
color more unevenly as will older skin with keratoses and mottled pigmentation. Color will
also be maintained longer in these areas.
As in the formulation, the pH of the skin before application may have an effect on the
tonality of the skin color (10). Alkaline residues from soaps or detergents may interfere with
the reaction between DHA and the amino acids on the skin surface, resulting in a less natural-
appearing (more yellow) color. Wiping the skin surface with a hydroalcoholic, acidic toner just
prior to DHA application may improve results. Ex vitro epidermal studies suggest that skin
hydration (23) and relative humidity (24) influence the development of coloration.
Careful directions provided with these products are therefore quite important in
determining consumer satisfaction. The skin may be prepared with a mild form of exfoliation.
Even application is required with lighter application around elbows, knees, and ankles to
avoid excessive darkening in these areas. Care also needs to be taken around the hairline
where lighter hair may darken. Hands need to be washed immediately after use to avoid
darkening of the palms, fingers, and nails. Skill and experience are necessary with using these
products resulting in greater user satisfaction.
ADDITIVES
As commonly occurs, growth in this category has compelled both formulators and marketers to
seek points of differentiation between their product and that of their competitors. Besides
formulating for specific skin types, active treatment ingredients may be incorporated into DHA-
containing formulations. Vitamins, botanical extracts, antioxidants, anti-irritants, and even
a-hydroxy acids may be added to broaden the claims made with a given product. Addition of
antioxidants can shift tonality to a more natural coloration (25). The addition of sunscreen
ingredients to self-tanners warrants a more detailed discussion in the section that follows.
Some newer formulations have included colorants as used in bronzers, including dyes
and caramel, to achieve an immediate makeup effect. Similarly, tinting with titanium oxide or
iron oxides can provide immediate color and allow the user to more easily visualize the
evenness of application. Metal oxides may however induce degradation of DHA (15). To
compensate for less red absorption by the products of the Maillard reaction, erythrulose may
be added as a colorant to add red to the tone.
SUNSCREEN ACTIVITY
In the United States, the FDA Tentative Final Over-the-Counter Monograph on Sunscreens
(Fed. Reg. 1993) listed DHA as an approved sunscreen ingredient when used sequentially with
lawsone (2-hydroxy-1,4-napthoquinone). The final monograph (Fed. Reg. 1999) removed this
Skin Care Products
341

=== Page 359 ===
combination from the approved list. The European Economic Community Directive does not
list DHA as a permitted UV filter.
DHA itself has at most a modest effect on SPF (26), providing perhaps SPF 3 or 4. SPF
increases with DHA concentration and number of applications (27). Low-level SPF persists for
several days decreasing with loss of color (28). The brown color obtained on the skin does
absorb in the low end of the visible spectrum with overlap into long UVA and may provide
some UVA I protection (29). Melanoidins can act as free-radical scavengers as they demonstrate
an electron spin resonance signal (14). Superficial skin coloration induced by frequent topical
application of DHA in high concentrations may delay skin cancer development in hairless mice
irradiated with moderate UV doses (30).
Individuals using DHA-containing tanning products need to be cautioned that despite
visible darkening of their skin, these products provide minimal sun protection. Confusion may
be compounded by the addition of UV filters to the formulation providing significant sun
protection. The stated SPF for the product is applicable for a few hours after application, but
not for the days during which the skin color change may remain perceptible.
INDICATIONS
Even with recent improvement in DHA formulations, the color achieved remains dependent
on skin type. Individuals of medium complexion with skin phototypes II or III (31), as opposed
to those who are lighter or darker, will obtain a more pleasing color. Individuals with underlying
golden skin tones will achieve better results than individuals with rosy, sallow, or olive
complexion. Older consumers with roughened, hyperkeratotic skin, or mottled pigmentation
with freckling may be less pleased with their use.
Dermatologists regularly recommend these products for tanning as a safe alternative to
UV exposure. They may be used to camouflage some skin irregularities such as leg spider
veins. Light to medium complected patients with vitiligo who show increased contrast with
the vitiliginous areas with natural or unavoidable tanning in their normal skin may also benefit
(32,33). They may even provide some protection for individuals with certain photosensitivity
disorders (34). Protection of uninvolved skin by DHA during psoralen-UVA treatment (PUVA)
allows higher UVA exposures to be tolerated, with fewer treatments resulting in faster clearing
know as turbo-PUVA (35).
SAFETY
The visible color change associated with the use of artificial tanning products might suggest to
some users that these products are hazardous. On the basis of the chemistry of DHA and its
toxicological profile, it can be considered nontoxic. It reacts quickly in the stratum corneum,
minimizing systemic absorption. The acute toxicity of DHA was investigated for diabetics in
the 1920s with oral intake well tolerated (15). The phosphate of DHA is found naturally as one
of the intermediates in the Krebs cycle.
Contact dermatitis to DHA has only rarely been reported (36). As with other topical
products with active ingredients, such as sunscreens, much of the reported sensitivity is
secondary to other ingredients in the vehicle (37). Adverse reactions are more likely to occur on
the basis of irritation and not true allergy. Ultimately, all claims related to product safety are
based on testing the final formulation.
ALTERNATIVE TANNING AGENTS
Lawsone found that henna plant and juglone (5-hydroxy-1,4,-napthoquinone) derived from
walnuts also stain hair, skin, and nails. They have been used for centuries for hair coloring.
Both substances lack skin substantivity and readily discolor clothing (38). The skin color they
produce does not resemble a natural tan.
On the basis of the underlying principle of the Maillard reaction, other molecules with a
ketone function have been investigated (39). An a-hydroxy group attached with electron-
withdrawing groups can also increase reactivity. Substances such as glyceraldehyde and
342
Levy

=== Page 360 ===
glyoxal (40) have been described but found ineffective. Mucondialdehyde as described by
Eichler (41) is an effective agent, but associated toxicity mitigated against its use (39). Although
several other aldehydes have been shown to have better color properties, stability issues limit
their use (39).
CONCLUSION
Increasing consumer awareness to the hazards of UV light should fuel ongoing interest in self-
tanning products. The benign toxicologic profile of DHA reinforces the notion that these
products represent a safe alternative to a UV-induced tan. The results obtained with these
products are dependent on the final formulation, individual application technique, and the
consumers’ complexion type. Greater experience in formulation combined with increasing
sophistication on the part of the consumer should lead to continuing growth and satisfaction
with the use of these products.
Consumers need to be clearly informed that these products do not offer significant
protection against UVB. If formulated with standard sunscreens, consumers should be
cautioned that the duration of UV protection is more short lived than the color change.
REFERENCES
1. Brooks K, Brooks D, Dajani Z, et al. Use of artificial tanning products among young adults. J Am Acad
Dermatol 2006; 54(6):1060–1066.
2. Beckmann KR, Kirke BA, McCaul KA, et al. Use of fake tanning lotions in the South Australian
population. Med J Aust 2001: 174(2):75–78.
3. Stryker JE, Yaroch AL, Moser RP, et al. Prevalence of sunless tanning product use and related
behaviors among adults in the United States: results from a national survey. J Am Acad of Dermatol
2007; 56(3):387–390.
4. Mahler HI, Kulik JA, Harrell J, et al. Effects or UV photographs, photoaging information, and use of
sunless tanning lotion on sun protection behaviors. Arch Dermatol 2005; 141(3):373–380.
5. Sheehan DJ, Lesher JL. The effect of sunless tanning on behavior in the sun: a pilot study. South Med J
2005; 98(12):1192–1195.
6. Wenninger JA, McEwen GN Jr., eds. International cosmetic ingredient dictionary and handbook.11th
ed. Washington: The Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association, 2006.
7. Brown DA. Skin pigmentation enhancers. J Photochem Photobiol 2001; 63:148–161.
8. Guest GM, Cochrane W, Wittgenstein E. Dihydroxyacetone tolerance test for glycogen storage
disease. Mod Prob Paediat 1959; 4:169–178.
9. Wittgenstein E, Berry HK. Staining of skin with dihydroxyacetone. Science 1960; 132:894–895.
10. Maes DH, Marenus KD. Self-tanning products. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Cosmetic
Dermatology. 3rd ed. London: Taylor & Francis, 2005:225–227.
11. Aretz C, Buczys R, Buchholz, K, et al. Degradation reactions of dihydroxyacetone. Euro Cosmetics
1999; 6:32–36.
12. Wittgenstein E, Berry HK. Reaction of dihydroxyacetone (DHA) with human skin callus and amino
compounds. J Invest Dermatol 1961; 36:283–286.
13. Meybeck A. A spectroscopic study of the reaction products of dihydroxyacetone with aminoacids.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:25–35.
14. Lloyd RV, Fong AJ, Sayre RM. In vivo formation of Maillard reaction free radicals in mouse skin.
J Invest Dermatol 2001; 117:740–742.
15. Chaudhuri RK. Dihydroxyactone: chemistry and and applications in self-tanning products. In:
Schlossman ML, ed. The Chemistry and Manufacture of Cosmetics. Volume III. Carol Stream, Illinois:
Allured Publishing, 2002:383–402.
16. Bobin MF, Martini MC, Cotte J. Effects of color adjuvants on the tanning effect of dihydroxyacetone.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1984; 35:265–272.
17. Purcetti G, Leblanc RM. A sunscreen tanning compromise: 3D visualization of the actions of titanium
dioxide particles and dihydroxyacetone on human epidermis. Photochem Photobiol 2000; 71:426–430.
18. Maibach HI, Kligman AM. Dihydroxyacetone: a suntan-simulating agent. Arch Dermatol 1960;
82:505–507.
19. Pierard GE, Pierard-Franchimont C. Dihydroxyacetone test as a substitute for the dansyl chloride test.
Dermatology 1993; 186(2):133–137.
20. Forest SE, Grothaus JT, Ertel KD, et al. Flourescence spectral imaging of dihydroxyacetone on skin
in vivo. Photochem Photobiol 2003; 77:524–530.
Skin Care Products
343

=== Page 361 ===
21. Goldman L, Barkoff J, Blaney D, et al. The skin coloring agent dihydroxyacetone. General Practitioner
1960; 12:96–98.
22. Levy SB. Dihydroxyacetone-containing sunless or self-tanning lotions. J Am Acad Dermatol 1992;
27:989–993.
23. Nguyen BC, Kochevar IE. Influence of hydration on dihydroxyacetone-induced pigmentation of
stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120:655–661.
24. Nguyen BC, Kochevar IE. Factors influencing sunless tanning with dihydroxyacetone. Br J Dermatol
2003; 149:332–340.
25. Muizzuddin N, Marenus KD, Maes DH. Tonality of suntan vs sunless tanning with dihydrox-
yacetone. Skin Res Technol 2000; 6:199–204.
26. Muizzuddin N. Marenus KD, Maes DH. UV-A and UV-B protective effect of melanoids formed with
dihydroxyacetone and skin. Poster 360 presented at the 55th Annual Meeting of the American
Academy of Dermatology, San Francisco, 1997.
27. Faurschou A, Janjua NR, Wulf HC. Sun protection effect of dihydroxyacetone. Arch Dermatolol 2004;
140:886–887.
28. Faurschou A, Wulf HC. Durability of the sun protection factor provided by dihydroxyacetone.
Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2004; 20:239–242.
29. Johnson JA, Fusaro RM. Protection against long ultraviolet radiation: topical browning agents and a
new outlook. Dermatologica 1987; 175:53–57.
30. Petersen AB, Na R, Wulf HC. Sunless skin tanning with dihydroxyacetone delays broad spectrum
ultraviolet photocarcinogenesis in hairless mice. Mutat Res 2003; 542:129–138.
31. Fitzpatrick TB. The validity and practicality of sunreactive skin types I through IV. Arch Dermatolo
1988; 124:869–871.
32. Fesq H, Brockow K, Strom K, et al. Dihydroxyacetone in a new formulation—a powerful therapeutic
option in vitiligo. Dermatology 2001; 203:241–243.
33. Suga Y, Ikejima A, Matsuba S, et al. Medical pearl DHA application for camouflaging segmental
vitiligo and piebald lesions. J Am Acad Dermatol 2002; 47:436–438.
34. Fusaro RM, Johnson JA. Photoprotection of patients sensitive to short and/or long ultraviolet light
with dihydroxyacetone/naphthoquinone. Dermatologica 1974; 148:224–227.
35. Taylor CR, Kwagsukstith C, Wimberly J, et al. Turbo-PUVA: dihydroxyacetone-enhanced photo-
chemotherapy for psoriasis: a pilot study. Arch Dermatol 1999; 135:540–544.
36. Morren M, Dooms-Goossens A, Heidbuchel M, et al. Contact allergy to dihydroxyacetone. Contact
Dermatitis 1991; 25:326–327.
37. Foley P, Nixon R, Marks R, et al. The frequency of reaction to sunscreens: results of a longitudinal
population-based study on the regular use of sunscreens in Australia. Br J Dermatol 1993; 128:512–518.
38. Reiger MM. The chemistry of tanning. Cosmet Toiletr 1983; 98:47–50.
39. Kurz T. Formulating effective self-tanners with DHA. Cosm & Toil 1994; 109:11:55–61.
40. Goldman L, Barkoff J. Blaney D, et al. Investigative studies with the skin coloring agents dihydroxyacetone
and glyoxal. J Invest Dermatol 1960; 35:161–164.
41. Eichler J. Prinzipien der Haptbraunung. Kontakte (Merck) 1981; 111:24–30.
344
Levy

=== Page 362 ===
33
Reconstructed Human Skin and
Skin Organ Culture Models Used
in Cosmetic Efficacy Testing
Alain Mavon and Daniel Bacqueville
Skin Pharmacokinetics Laboratory, Pierre Fabre Dermo-Cosme´tique, Castanet-Tolosan, France
Bart De Wever
Business Development, Phenion GmbH & Co.KG, Du¨sseldorf, Germany
INTRODUCTION
The use of animals for research purposes and especially for cosmetic efficacy testing has been a
sensitive matter for several decades. Regulatory agencies and political as well as scientific
communities have put constant pressure to ban the use of animals for such purposes. In
Europe, this has forced the Council of the European Union to approve legislation for banning
the use of animals for testing cosmetic products, starting March 2009. This implies that
alternative methods require validation by the European Center for the Validation of
Alternative Methods (ECVAM). To date, only a few alternative testing methods have been
validated for toxicological testing using reconstructed human skin models. Nevertheless,
human skin equivalents, such as reconstructed human epidermis (RHE), full-thickness (FT)
skin, or skin organ culture (SOC) models have already been adopted by cosmetic laboratories
as alternatives to animal experimentation for quite some time. These models not only allow to
comply with the demands of regulatory authorities, animal welfare organizations, and
consumers but also provide a means to improve and extend our knowledge on skin biology.
Moreover, they have proven to be reliable, efficient, informative, and predictive tools for
screening, bioavailability, and efficacy testing of active ingredients.
One of the main reasons for the development of reconstituted human skin (RHS) models
is the fact that they mimic more closely human skin in vivo, which includes the presence of a
stratum corneum, allowing topical application of both aqueous and oily solutions as well as
final formulations. Three-dimensional (3D) skin models are composed of either the epidermal
compartment or both the epidermal and dermal compartments. Various cells types can be
incorporated within each compartment, including melanocytes and Langerhans cells in the
epidermis and fibroblasts and endothelial cells in the dermis. Because the use of RHS models
requires a substantial amount of expertise, including internal benchmark validation, which
often requires considerable financial resources, and given the fact that these models have some
inherent limitations, especially an impaired barrier function, skin organ culture models are
also being used as alternatives for cosmetic efficacy testing.
In this chapter, we first present a review about the development of reconstructed skin
models, followed by an overview of the commercially available ones. We review a selection
of published literature using commercially available models as well as homemade models
developed in research laboratories used for in-house testing of cosmetic formulation. This
overview will mostly focus on studies in oxidative stress photoprotection evaluation and
pigmentation assessment. A brief review of more complex and integrated skin models for
clinical use is also discussed. Then, we present the results of two sets of experiments carried
out using both RHE and SOC models. The first experiment deals with vitamin E prodrug, its
diffusion and metabolism in RHE and human SOC models, and also its efficacy in the
prevention of UV-induced lipid peroxidation in RHE. The second experiment studies the
response of RHE and a pig SOC model to solar radiation–induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis
and tests the efficacy of a sunscreen formulation. In conclusion, these studies on cosmetic
efficacy testing confirm that both RHS and SOC models represent complementary models with
a genuine added value for the cosmetic testing.

=== Page 363 ===
SKIN EQUIVALENTS USED IN COSMETIC EFFICACY TESTING
Basic Research on Reconstructed Human Skin
New and stricter regulations have led researchers and companies to develop in vitro tissue
models to be used in the study of cutaneous biochemistry and physiology. An excellent
guideline enumerates the processes used in developing these cell culture models (1). Briefly,
Bell’s model (2), the first in vitro reconstructed model, developed in 1979, was a dermal
equivalent composed of fibroblasts in a collagen lattice. Rheinwald and Green (3) fortuitment
found that under certain culture conditions a teratogenic cell lines undergoes a maturation that
mimics epidermal keratinization (3). Later, the major breakthrough was the culture of
keratinocytes (KCs) at the air-liquid interface (4), leading to the formation of a multilayered
and differentiated epidermis, a characterisitc of all types existing in 3-D skin models. This
differentiation program provided the crucial stratum corneum (SC) layer, which constitutes a
barrier function for reconstructed models. As cell culture undergoes constant evolution,
various models were subsequently designed by differentiating KC cultures on different
supports: inert filters (5–7), dermal substrate such as collagen matrices (8,9), lyophilized
collagen-GAG membranes (10), de-epidermized dermis (DED) (11), and fibroblast-populated
dermal substrates (12,13). Some of the above mentioned commercially available skin models
are listed in Table 1.
Morphological studies (14,15) have shown that RHS models form a multilayered
epithelium, displaying characteristic epidermal structure and expressing markers of epider-
mal differentiation. Ultrastructurally, keratohyalin granules, lamellar bodies, and lamellar
structures filled with epidermal lipids are present in the stratum granulosum and SC. The SC
layer, a corneified barrier for RHS models (Fig. 1), is composed of multiple lipid lamellae
located in the intercellular spaces between keratinized cells, a corneocyte lipid envelope, and
desmosomal structures. This barrier is associated with an epidermis calcium gradient, similar
to that found in native human skin (16). However, it has been established that there is a
difference in the lipid organization, with a hexagonal SC lipids packing in RHS, whereas in
native skin it is orthorhombic (17). This difference may account for the 5- to 50-fold higher
penetration rate observed in RHS models for most of the substances tested (18). In addition,
the recent scientific committee on consumer products (SCCP) guidelines in dermal absorption
Table 1
Commercially Available RHS and SOC Models
Company/laboratory
Skin models
Web site
Biopre´dic, Rennes, France
Skin organotypic culture Natskin1 (human
skin), 1.0 and 1.6 cm2
www.biopredic.com
CellSystems, St Katarinen,
Reconstructed human epidermis (EST 1000)
www.cellsystems.de
Germany
Full-thickness skin (AST 2000)
MatTek Corp. Ashland, MA, U.S.
Reconstructed human epidermis (EpiDerm1),
0.9 cm2
www.mattek.com
Full-thickness skin (EpiDermFT1), 1.2 cm2
Reconstructed pigmented epidermis,
(Melanoderm1), 0.9 cm2
Melanoma skin model, 0.6 cm2
Phenion GmbH & Co. KG
(Henkel), Du¨sseldorf, Germany
Reconstructed human epidermis (OS-REP)
0.63 cm2
www.phenion.com
Full-thickness skin (Phenion FT), 1.3 cm2
SkinEthic, (L’Ore´al), Nice, France
Reconstructed human epidermis, 0.5/4 and
0.11/0.33 cm2 in 24/96 well plate
www.skinethic.com
Reconstructed pigmented epidermis, 0.5 cm2
Full-thickness skin (Episkin1), 0.38/1.07 cm2
StratiCell, Gembloux, Belgium
Reconstructed human epidermis
www.straticell.com
Genetically modified reconstituted human
epidermis
Reconstructed human 3-D dermis
Reconstructed full-skin equivalent
Technical specifications and ordering informations for these skin models can be found in the respective Web
site. Some of these companies also supply reconstructed epithelia models (buccal, vaginal, pulmonary etc.).
346
Mavon et al.

=== Page 364 ===
of cosmetic ingredient (19) consider that RHS models as alternative membranes are inadequate
for use in dermal absorption study because of this impaired barrier function. In spite of these
differences (18,20), the presence of the SC on skin equivalents makes it possible to apply a great
variety of active ingredients topically. In addition, through metabolism studies performed on 3-D
human reconstructs and reviewed in details (21), most of 3-D skin equivalents (RHE, FT skin, or
SOC) are metabolically representative of human skin and therefore can be used as a good
surrogate model for human skin. For instance, similar enzymatic activities, such as phase I and
phase II enzymes were found in RHE (22), making them efficient models for toxicological
assessment. Other enzymatic activities, such as esterase, b-glucocerebrosidase, or 5a-reductase
are also found in skin equivalents. Accordingly, reconstructed skin models were used
successfully in the study of the controlled release of pro-vitamin E into free tocopherol (as
referred to in details in section “Skin Absorption, Metabolism, and Antioxidant Efficiency of
Vitamin E Prodrugs) (23,24), and of testosterone metabolism with androgen modulators (25).
Table 1 lists the commercially available skin models used for pharmaco-toxicological
trials. Reconstructed epidermis models are first used for irritation testing, and some have
already been validated or are in the process of being validated for this use. Providers now offer
pigmented epidermis as well as FT skin models. However, the fact that only a handful
companies are capable of producing skin models in sufficiently large quantities demands for
some careful consideration. For instance, in 2006, Episkin1 (L’Ore´al group) acquired SkinEthic
Laboratories. The resulting situation created a kind of monopoly situation in Europe (15).
In addition, all models currently validated are either protected by patents or being
commercialized using proprietary tissue culture procedures by only a few private companies;
hence, their continued availability is dependent only and entirely on the corporate strategies of
these companies and therefore cannot be guaranteed for the long-term future. In addition,
although it is generally accepted that the reconstructed epidermal models currently available
are all “comparable,” intrinsic differences inherent to their proprietary manufacturing
procedures have been causing reasonable concern in the scientific community; for instance,
the test protocol transferability from one model to another is often limited and considered a
bottleneck for method acceptance both at industry and regulatory levels.
Not only for regulatory toxicology testing but also in cosmetic efficacy testing, the use of these
models requires great care and must include the appropriate controls and an analysis of reliable and
reproducible endpoints. Accordingly, multiple endpoint analysis (MEA) including tissue viability,
morphology, and the release of proinflammatory mediators should be used to determine the
efficacy of a cosmetic product (26). One of these endpoints is the MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol)-2,5-
diphenyltetrazolium bromide] toxicity test (27), which measures either cellular viability and
therefore the cytotoxic effects of external stress or a cosmetic formulation. We recently determined,
for instance, that the release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) into the culture medium is a more
relevant endpoint than MTT assay to study irritation and solar-induced cellular damages in SOC
models (28).
Applications of Skin Equivalents in Cosmetic Efficacy Testing
Below we describe some experiments carried out to determine the effects of UVB-UVA
irradiation as inducer of oxidative stress and photoaging. Studies performed to measure
photoprotection and monitor the pigmentation process in a pigmented skin model are also
Figure 1
Histological section of different skin models. (A) A reconstructed human epidermis (SkinEthic
Laboratories, Nice, Francea); a polycarbonate membrane supports a stratified epidermis. (B) A full-thickness skin
model (Phenion1a) with a stratified epidermis on a dermal equivalent. (C) Human SOC model from personal data.
Reconstructed Human Skin and Skin Organ Culture Models
347

=== Page 365 ===
discussed. Finally, new and “clinical use” models of skin equivalents are presented as
potentially useful tools for the testing of future cosmetic formulations.
Oxidative Stress and Photoprotection
The skin is directly exposed to external oxidative stress, and in vitro RHE models have been
used in the evaluation of ozone- (29) or UVA- (30) induced lipid hydroperoxides (LPOs). Ex
vivo pig and human SOC models have been also developed as tool for use in investigating
short-term UV-induced damage (31) and time course and spatial distribution of UV effects
(32). Such experiments have demonstrated that skin models are sensitive to UV and that
topical application of various antioxidants could successfully be evaluated against UV-induced
oxidative stress by reducing apoptotic response and DNA damages: combination of vitamins
on a pig SOC model (33), topical application of genisteine on a human SOC model (34), or
epigallocathecinegallate (35) and salicylic acid (36) in RHS. In addition, UVA dermal alterations in
an human SOC model and topical application of retinoids (37) induced the formation of newly
synthesized collagen, suggesting dermal repair on this “photoaged” skin model.
Moreover, although in vivo assays are essential for sunscreen testing [determination of
SPF (sun protection factor) and PFA (protection factor in UVA)], in vitro techniques based on
skin equivalents were developed and have shown to be very useful for these types of tests.
Using an RHS model, Augustin (38) showed the deleterious effects of both UVA and UVB
irradiation by measuring viability and Il-1a release assay, which were abolished following the
application of sunscreens. Also the apoptotic response was also assessed following UV
irradiation with and without photoprotection in RHE (39), RHS (40), and pig SOC (41) (see
experimental details and results in section “Deleterious Effects of Solar Radiation and
Sunscreen Efficacy Testing on Both RHE and Pig SOC”). In general, all these skin models
demonstrate their usefulness and ability to model UV-induced damages, which can be
reversed in presence of photoprotectant formulations.
Pigmentation
Pigmented RHS are cocultures of both KCs and melanocytes. The integration of melanocytes
from different ethnic regions results in a pigmented epidermis (42) or skin equivalent (43)
reflecting Caucasian, Asian, and African-American skin phenotypes. These models provide an
interesting alternative to animal testing for evaluating the regulation of mammalian
pigmentation by melanogenic factors and for elucidating the mechanisms of action of these
factors. Using these models, it has been demonstrated that the protease-activated receptor-2
(PAR-2) pathway (44) regulates pigmentation via melanosome transfer, but only when KCs
and melanocytes are in contact. Gibbs has shown (45) that a complete program of
melanogenesis occurs following UVB irradiation and supplementation with 3-isobutyl-1-
methyl-xanthine: melanosome synthesis, melanosome transport to KCs, supranuclear capping
of KC nuclei, and tanning of the epidermis. Dysfunctionnal pigmentation can also be assessed
through the use of in vitro recontructed models. A xeroderma pigmentosa skin model was
reconstrcuted to study genetic hyperphotosensitivity (46). Recently, an RHS model was
engineered with normal nonsegmental nonlesional vitiligo cells (47), and tested under stressed
conditions (H2O2). First results seem to support the melanocytorrhagic hypothesis of vitiligo.
Additionally, pigmented skin tissue models provide a useful tool in the comparison of
the inhibitors (kojic acid, arbutin, and hydroquinone) and activators (a-MSH and
dihydroxyphenylalanine) of melanogenesis (43) after repeated topical application or systemic
delivery (48). Pigmented skin tissue is also useful in the assessment of the antipigmentation
effects of sunblocks.
New and “Clinical Use” Skin Models
Tissue engineering attempts to reconstruct complete skin tissue, integrating different cellular
types. Most of the previously mentioned skin models are comprised of KCs, fibroblast,
melanocytes, and endothelial cells. However, the skin is an immune organ, displaying an
elaborated enervated system. Immunoreactive reconstructed skin containing Langerhans cells
has been reconstructed. The immune response of this RHS was demonstrated by a reduction in
the number of Langerhans cells and by a modification in their dendritic morphology (49) after
348
Mavon et al.

=== Page 366 ===
exposure to sensitizers or UV irradiation. Another immunocompetent reconstructed model
was developed, comprising epidermal Langerhans cells, dermal dendritic cell, and endothelial
cell activated to acquire HLA-DR expression (50). This model provides a complex environment-
integrating vascular components to study the differentiation of interstitial dendritic cells in
the dermis. Also a “neuronal” epidermal model was developed to evaluate the regeneration
of sensory neurons on injured skin (51), which was mainly influenced by the extracellular
matrix molecules, matrix-binding growth factors, and trophic factors.
In addition to these “dermo-cosmetic” models, tissue engineering has led to the
developement of complex reconstructed models for clinical indications such as grafting ulcers,
treatment of burn patients, and wound repair. Some of these models are commercially available:
ApligrafTM, AllodermTM, IntegraTM, DermagraftTM, and OrcelfTM (52). Last, but not the least, a
model comprising of endothelial cells was created for testing potentially angiogenic molecules
(53) as well as for treating recalcitrant leg ulcers through split-thickness skin autografting (54).
As perspective, additional development in the two integrative aspects of neovascularization and
reinnervation is necessary for such skin reconstructs to reach their full therapeutic potential.
Clearly, such “complete” skin models would be of great interest for integrated pharmaco-
toxicological trials of the future cosmetic formulations.
EXAMPLES OF COSMETIC EFFICACY TESTING USING SKIN MODELS
After this brief literature review, we report our results obtained on two sets of experi-
mentations using both RHE and SOC models. The first one deals with a skin diffusion and
metabolism study of two vitamin E prodrugs on RHE and human SOC models (24), followed by
determination of the antioxidant protection on RHE. The second example (41,55) shows the
biological response to UV irradiation through cytotoxicity, DNA damage, and apoptosis in
both RHE and pig SOC models treated with and without photoprotection.
Skin Absorption, Metabolism, and Antioxidant Efficiency of Vitamin E Prodrugs (24)
The development of prodrug technology is intended to avoid certain undesirable properties of
topically applied drugs, such as instability and pro-oxidant effects. Accordingly, cutaneous
metabolism could be considered as a critical determinant of the efficacy of these topically
applied molecules, especially for the delivery of a pharmacologically active molecule through
the skin. A gluco-vitamin E conjugate, d-tocopherol glucoside (d-TG) has been synthesized by
making use of b-glucocerebrosidase activity, which hydrolyzes amphiphilic b-glucocerebrosides
into ceramides. The resulting glycosidic bond cleavage allows the release of active vitamin E into
the SC. The skin penetration and metabolism of d-TG were evaluated in 18-hour studies in both
RHE (SkinEthic Laboratories, Nice, France) and human SOC (Biopredic, Rennes, France) models.
In addition, the efficacy of delivery of free tocopherol in a 0.5% d-TG solution was tested by
means of an lipid hydroperoxide (LPO) assay prior to solar irradiation (105 mJ/cm2) on the
extracted lipids. All these experiments were assessed in comparison with a-tocopherol acetate
(a-TAc), the most common vitamin E prodrug known to be converted in the skin (23,56).
Following an infinite dose prodrug solution applied on RHE, a better diffusion was
observed for a-TAc. However, no metabolism was detected with a-TAc. In contrast, 20% and
50% of d-TG was bioconverted into free tocopherol in both SC and epidermis, respectively. A
kinetic study with a 0.05% finite dose of d-TG solution applied on RHE showed that about
90% of the prodrug was converted at 18 hours. A similar experiment on viable human skin
confirmed that no free tocopherol was detected from a-TAc, in spite of the fact that the amount
diffused was four times higher than the amount of d-TG (Table 2). The compartmental
distribution study confirmed a delivery of free tocopherol from d-TG. The highest amount was
found in the SC, then in the epidermis and also in the dermis (Table 2). Antioxidant efficacy is
obtained only if the prodrug is metabolized into free tocopherol, and this was confirmed by a
70% decrease in LPO concentration after treatment with d-TG, in contrast to treatment with
a-TAc (Fig. 2) or the positive control (irradiated lipids). After topical application, d-TG had a
reservoir effect, associated with gradual delivery of free tocopherol. This experiment enabled
us to demonstrate that RHE and human SOC models are complementary. Indeed, RHE can be
used to confirm the metabolism and the efficacy of an active ingredient, as a result of its low
barrier function, offering better bioavailability of the molecule being tested. Finally, human
Reconstructed Human Skin and Skin Organ Culture Models
349

=== Page 367 ===
SOC on the other hand, having a more efficient barrier function, can be used either as
preclinical model or in the optimization of an active ingredient concentration to be included in
the formulation.
Deleterious Effects of Solar Radiation and Sunscreen Efficacy Testing
on Both RHE and Pig SOC (41,55)
Solar radiations are a major concern for human health since they have been recognized as an
environmental human carcinogen, and they also contribute to the photoaging process (57–59).
Today, sunfilters provide a good protection against the harmful effects of UVA and UVB
radiations. However, the ban of animal testing in cosmetic industry urges to develop new
alternative models to discover innovative strategies of skin photoprotection and to assess the
photoprotective capacities of a sunblock formulation. In this context, we recently developed
a short-term ex vivo skin organ culture model from domestic pig ears (Fig. 3) and also
investigated solar-induced cytotoxicity and photoprotection. Furthermore, the results were
compared to data obtained with in vitro RHE (SkinEthic Laboratories, Nice, France).
Skin samples were irradiated by using a suntest apparatus and received a single solar-
simulated radiation (SSR) dose up to 275 kJ m2. This acute UV dose corresponds to about
fivefold minimal erythemal doses (MEDs). The sunburn cells (SBCs) corresponding to
apoptotic KCs following UVB exposure were easily detected by hematoxylin staining 24 hours
postirradiation in pig skin and RHE models. These dying cells were mainly located in the basal
layers of the epidermis. Furthermore, the deleterious effects of SSR were associated with the
formation of thymine dimers (Fig. 4) and DNA fragmentation (Fig. 5) in both the epidermal
and dermal compartments in both tissue models, as respectively assayed by immunohis-
tochemistry and TUNEL technique (TdT-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling). None of these
Figure 2
Concentration of lipid hydroperoxide (LPO) in lipids extracted from RHE, after 18-hour topical
application of a 0.5% solution of the prodrugs with or without UV irradiation (n ¼ 4) showing an antioxidant activity
only when the skin model was treated with d-TG (last bar).
Table 2
Compartmental Analysis [Surface, Stratum Corneum (10 Tape Strippings), Epidermis, and Dermis] of
Two Prodrugs (d-Tocopherol-Glucoside and a-Tocopherol Acetate), Their Conversion into Free Tocopherol, and
Percentage of Metabolism After 18 Hours’ Incubation in Viable Human Skin [Mean (S.E.)], (n ¼ 6)
Analyte
Surface
in mg/cm2
Stratum corneum
in mg/cm2
Epidermis
in mg/cm2
Dermis in mg/cm2
a-TAc
0.17 (0.04)
2.98 (0.18)
0.80 (0.27)
0.79 (0.45)
a-Toc
Not detected
Not detected
Not detected
Not detected
% of metabolite
/
/
/
/
d-TG
3.44 (0.45)
0.78 (0.27)
0.35 (0.24)
0.16 (0.09)
d-Toc
0.04 (0.04)
0.12 (0.07)
0.10 (0.04)
0.02 (0.02)
% of metabolite
1.1
15.3
29.2
13.1
350
Mavon et al.

=== Page 368 ===
cellular responses was observed in nonirradiated skin. The DNA damage was clearly
correlated to SSR-induced cytotoxicity since a significant level of LDH activity and
extracellular signal-related kinase 2 (ERK2) protein were recovered in the culture supernatant
from the irradiated skin models (Fig. 6). The SSR-induced apoptosis involved the upregulation
of the p53 tumor suppressor and the activation of the caspase-3 protease. Interestingly,
caspase-3 activation was detected mainly in the basal epidermis after irradiation in pig skin
organ culture. Thus, basal KCs might be more sensitive to UV exposure than suprabasal KCs
and dermal fibroblasts.
To explore whether pig SOC and RHE models are suitable for investigating photo-
protection, a broad-spectrum UVBþA sunscreen formulation, was topically applied on skin
samples at a dose of 2 mg cm2. The experiments showed that the sunfilter provides good
photoprotection without affecting skin viability in both tissue models. Indeed, sunscreen
application completely abrogated not only SBCs and DNA damage formation (Figs. 4 and 5)
but also the LDH/ERK2 leakage and caspase-3 activation in irradiated models. These data are
Figure 3
Pig ear SOC. (A) Schematic representation of the organ culture system. Skin was excised from
domestic pig ears, sectioned at 500-mm thickness, and punched into 12-mm diameter discs. The explants were
then seeded in gelatin-coated polycarbonate Transwell1 inserts in 12-well plate prefilled with culture medium.
(B) The multilayered structure of the porcine epidermis. Hematoxylin staining. Abbreviations: SC, stratum
corneum; GL, granular layer; SL, spinous layer; BL, basal layer.
Figure 4
Thymine dimer formation
after solar irradiation in pig skin and
RHE. Skin was pretreated with or with-
out sunscreen, and then exposed to
solar-simulated radiation. Thymine
dimers were identified by immunofluor-
escence 24 hours postirradiation. Note
that topical application of sunscreen
prevented the formation of DNA lesions
in keratinocyte nuclei stained with a
DNA fluorescent staining (DAPI).
Dashed lines correspond to the dermal-
epidermal junction and filter surface
in pig skin and RHE, respectively.
Abbreviation: RHE, reconstructed
human epidermis.
Reconstructed Human Skin and Skin Organ Culture Models
351

=== Page 369 ===
in agreement with previous results obtained in various skin models (31,32,39,40) and in clinical
studies with sunscreen-treated volunteers (60–62).
Altogether, our results indicate that both pig SOC and RHE models are good surrogates
to human tissue and that these 3-D alternative models are relevant tools to better understand
SSR-induced phototoxicity and to evaluate sunscreen efficacy against UVB and UVA damage.
Figure 5
DNA strand breaks after
solar irradiation in pig skin and RHE.
Skin was pretreated with or without
sunscreen, and then exposed to solar-
simulated radiation. DNA strand breaks
were identified 24 hours postirradiation
by TUNEL reaction using fluorescein-
dUTP. Note that topical application of
sunscreen prevented the formation of
DNA lesions in both dermal fibroblast
and keratinocyte nuclei stained with
DAPI. Dashed lines correspond to the
dermal-epidermal junction and filter
surface in pig skin and RHE, respectively.
Abbreviations: TUNEL, dT-mediated
dUTP nick-end labeling; RHE, recon-
structed human epidermis.
Figure 6
Cytotoxicity after solar irradi-
ation in pig skin and RHE. Skin was
pretreated with or without sunscreen, and
then exposed to solar-simulated radia-
tion. Culture media were harvested 24
hours later and tested for the presence of
cytosolic proteins released from the
explants. (A) LDH activity was measured
by colorimetry using tetrazolium dye
(mean  SD, n ¼ 3, *p < 0.01).
(B) ERK2 expression was analyzed by
immunoblotting. Note that topical appli-
cation of sunscreen reduced the leakage
of both LDH and ERK2 from UV-irradiated
pig skin and RHE. Abbreviations: RHE,
reconstructed human epidermis; LDH,
lactate dehydrogenase.
352
Mavon et al.

=== Page 370 ===
GENERAL CONCLUSION
A substantial amount of effort is being put into the development and validation of skin models,
including reconstructed skin equivalents and skin organ culture models. Even if most of these skin
equivalents are not fully validated, they are already frequently being used to prove cosmetic
product effectiveness, and hence they represent a genuine added value for the cosmetics industry.
The increasing availability of complex reconstructed models offer a wide range of possibilities for
use in the efficacy evaluation of cosmetic ingredients, in spite of some limitations such as low
barrier function. In addition, these should be provided preferentially by multiple and independent
skin model suppliers as a guarantee of their availability to the cosmetic industry. The skin organ
culture models are less expensive than the in vitro reconstructed models, are easy to obtain, and
possess good barrier function. Accordingly, the combination of RHE and SOC models currently
provides a very useful and complementary test system and represents an essential step in the
pharmaco-toxicological trials needed in the development of cosmetic products, from screening on
cellular models to final validation in clinical trials.
REFERENCES
1. Boelsma E, Ponec M. Basics (guidelines) on cell cultures testing for topical/dermatological drug/
products and cosmetics with regard to efficacy and safety of the preparations. In: Gabard B, Elsner P,
Surber C, Treffel P, eds. Dermatopathology of Topical Preparations: A Product Development-
Oriented Approach. Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 2000:37–57.
2. Bell E, Ivarsson B, Merrill C. Production of a tissue-like structure by contraction of collagen lattices by
human fibroblasts of different proliferative potential in vitro. Cell Biol 1979; 76:1274–1278.
3. Rheinwald JG, Green H. Formation of a keratinizing epithelium in culture by a cloned cell line
derived from a teratoma. Cell 1975; 6:317–330.
4. Regnier M, Prunieras M, Woodley DT. Growth and differentiation of adult epidermal cells on dermal
substrates. Front Matrix 1981; 9:4–35.
5. Rosdy M, Clauss MC. Terminal differentiation of human keratinocytes grown in chemically defined
medium on inert filter substrates at the air-liquid interface. J Invest Dermatol 1990; 96:409–414.
6. Cannon CL, Neal PJ, Southee JA, et al. New epidermal model for dermal irritancy testing. Toxicol
In Vitro 1994; 8:889–891.
7. Poumay Y, Dupont F, Marcoux S, et al. A simple reconstructed human epidermis: preparation of the
culture model and utilization in in vitro studies. Arch Dermatol Res 2004; 296(5):203–211.
8. Tinois E, Tillier J, Gaucherand M, et al. In vitro and post transplantation differentiation of
keratinocytes growth on the human type IV collagen film of a bilayered dermal substitutes. Exp Cell
Res 1991; 193:310–319.
9. Wha Kim S, Lee IW, Cho HJ, et al. Fibroblasts and ascorbate regulate epidermalization in
reconstructed human epidermis. J Dermatol Sci 2002; 30(3):215–223.
10. Augustin C, Frei V, Perrier E, et al. A skin equivalent model for cosmetological trials and in vitro
efficacy study of a new peptide. Skin Pharmacol 1997; 10(2):63–70.
11. Ponec M, Weerheim A, Kempanaar J, et al. The formation of competent barrier lipids in reconstructed
epidermis requires the presence of vitamin C. J Invest Dermatol 1997; 109:348–355.
12. Hoffman JJ, Peters P, Frost P, et al. Advanced skin test 2000: reconstructed human skin designed for
dermatological and pharmaceutical research. In: the 4th World Congress on alternatives and animal
use in the life sciences; New Orleans, USA; August 11–15, 2002.
13. El Ghalbzouri A, Jonkman MF, Dijkman R, et al. Basement membrane reconstruction in human skin
equivalents is regulated by fibroblasts and/or exogenously activated keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol
2005; 124(1):79–86.
14. Ponec M. Skin constructs for replacement of skin tissues for in vitro testing. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002;
54(suppl 1):S19–S30.
15. Poumay Y, Coquette A. Modelling the human epidermis in vitro: tools for basic and applied research.
Arc Dermatol Res 2007; 298:361–369.
16. Ynsa MD, Gontier E, Mavon A, et al. Comparative study between reconstructed human epidermis
using nuclear microscopy. NIM Phys Res B 2006; 249(1–2):710–714.
17. Ponec M, Boelsma E, Weerheim A, et al. Lipid and ultrastructural characterization of reconstructed
skin models. Int J Pharm 2000; 203:211–225.
18. Garcia N, Doucet O, Bayer M, et al. Characterization of the barrier function in a reconstructed human
epidermis cultivated in a chemically defined medium. Int J Cosmet Sci 2002; 24:25–34.
19. Basic criteria for the in vitro assessment of dermal absorption of cosmetic ingredients. SCCP, 2006; 970/06.
Reconstructed Human Skin and Skin Organ Culture Models
353

=== Page 371 ===
20. Lotte C, Patouillet C, Zanini M, et al. Permeation and skin absorption: reproducibility of various industrial
reconstructed human skin models. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15(suppl 1):18–30.
21. Gibbs S, van de Standt JJM, Merk HF, et al. Xenobiotic metabolism in human skin and 3D human skin
reconstructs: a review. Current Drug Metab 2007; 8:758–772.
22. Harris IR, Siefken W, Beck-Oldach K, et al. Comparison of activities dependent on glutathione S-
transferase and cytochrome P-450 IA1 in cultured keratinocytes and reconstructed epidermal models.
Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15(suppl 1):59–67.
23. Nabi Z, Tavakkol A, Dobke M, et al. Bioconversion of vitamin E acetate in human skin. In: Thiele J,
Elsner P, eds. Oxidants and Antioxidants in Cutaneous Biology. Basel: Karger, 2001:29; 175–186.
24. Mavon A, Raufast V, Redoule`s D. Skin absorption and metabolism of a new vitamin E prodrug,
tocopherol-glucoside: in vitro evaluation in human skin models. J Control Release 2004; 100:221–231.
25. Bernard FX, Barrault C, Deguercy A, et al. Expression of type 1 5a-reductase and metabolism of
testosterone in reconstructed human epidermis (SkinEthic): a new model for screening skin-targeted
androgen modulators. Int J Cosmet Sci 2000; 22:397–407.
26. De Wever B, Charbonnier V. Using tissue engineered skin to evaluate the irritation potential of skin
care products. Cosmet Toilet Mag 2002; 117:28–36.
27. Mosmann T. Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: application to proliferation
and cytotoxicity assays. J Immunol Methods 1983; 65:55–63.
28. Bacqueville D, Boisson M, Mavon A. LDH is relevant endpoint biomarker to study irritation ansd
solar irradiation-induced damages in pig skin organ culture. J Invest Dermatol 2007; 127(1):S71.
29. Cotovio J, Onno L, Justine P, et al. Generation of oxidative stress in human cutaneous models
following in vitro ozone exposure. Toxicol In Vitro 2001; 15(4–5):357–362.
30. Seite S, Popovic E, Verdier MP, et al. Iron chelation can modulate UVA-induced lipid peroxidation
and ferritin expression in human reconstructed epidermis. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed
2004; 20(1):47–52.
31. Rijnkels JM, Witheley LO, Van Henegouwen GMJ. Time- and dose-related UVB damage in viable pig skin
explants held in a newly developed organ culture system. Photochem Photobiol 2001; 73(5):499–504.
32. Rijnkels JM, Moison RM, Podda E, et al. Photoprotection by antioxidants against UVB radiation-
induced damage in pig skin organ culture. Radiat Res 2003; 159(2):210–217.
33. Mori E, Takahasi A, Kitagawa K, et al. Time course and spatial distribution of UV effects on human
skin in organ culture. J Radiat Res 2008; 49:269–277.
34. Moore JO, Wang Y, Stebbing WG, et al. Photoprotective effect of isoflavone genistein on UVB
pyrimidine dimer formation and PCNA expression in human reconstructed skin and its implication
in dermatology and prevention of cutaneous carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 2006; 27(8):1627–1635.
35. Kim SO, Kim DS, Kwon SB, et al. Protective effect of EGCG on UVB-induced damage in living skin
equivalents. Arch Pharm Res 2005; 28(7):784–790.
36. Mammone T, Gan D, Goyarts E, et al. Salicylic acid protects the skin form UV damage. J Cosmet Sci
2006; 57(2):203–204.
37. Boisnic S, Branchet-Gumila MC, Le Charpentier Y, et al. Repair of UVA-induced elastic fiber and
collagen damage by 0.05% retinaldehyde cream in an ex vivo human skin model. Dermatology 1999;
199(suppl 1):43–48.
38. Augustin C, Collombel C, Damour O. Measurements of the protective effect of topically applied
sunscreens using in vitro three-dimensional dermal and skin equivalents. Photochem Photobiol 1997;
66(6):853–859.
39. Gelis C, Girard S, Mavon A, et al. Assessment of the photoprotective capacities of an organo-mineral
broad-spectrum sunblock on two ex vivo skin models. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2003;
19(5):242–253.
40. Fourtanier A, Bernerd F, Bouillon C, et al. Protection of skin biological targets by different types of
sunscreens. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2006; 22:22–32.
41. Bacqueville D, Mavon A. Caspase-3 activation and DNA damage in pig skin organ culture after solar
irradiation. Photochem Photobiol 2008; 84(5):1164–1171.
42. Regnier M, Duval C, Galey JB, et al. Keratinocyte-melanocyte co-cultures and pigmented
reconstructed human epidermis: models to study modulation of melanogenesis. Cell Mol Biol 1999;
45(7):969–980.
43. Yoon TJ, Lei TC, Yamaguchi Y, et al. Reconstituted 3-dimensional human skin of various ethnic
origins as an in vitro model for studies of pigmentation. Anal Biochem 2003; 318(2):260–269.
44. Seiberg M. Keratinocyte-melanocyte interactions during melanosome transfer. Pigment cell Res 2001;
14:236–242.
45. Gibbs S, Murli S, De Boer G, et al. Melanosome capping of keratinocytes in pigmented reconstructed
epidermis – effect of ultraviolet radiation and 3-isobutyl-1-methyl-xanthine on melanogenesis.
Pigment Cell Res 2000; 13(6):458–466.
46. Bernerd F, Asselineau Frechet M, Sarasin A, et al. Reconstruction of DNA repair-deficient XP skin
n vitro: a model to study hypersensitivity to UV light. Photochem Photobiol 2005; 81(1):19–24.
354
Mavon et al.

=== Page 372 ===
47. Cario-Andre M, Pain C, Gauthier Y, et al. The melanocytorrhagic hypothesis of vitligo tested on
pigmented, stressed, reconstituted epidermis. Pigment Cell Res 2007; 20(5):385–393.
48. Cario-Andre M, Briganti S, Picardo M, et al. Epidermal reconstructs: a new tool to study topical and
systemic photoprotective molecules. J Photochem Photobiol B 2002; 68:79–87.
49. Facy V, Flouret V, Regnier M, et al. Langerhans cells integrated into human recontructed epidermis
respond to known sensitizers and ultraviolet exposure. J Invest Dermatol 2004; 122(2):553–554.
50. Dezutter-Dambuyant C, Black A, Bechetoille N, et al. Evolutive skin recontructions: from the dermal
collagen-GAG-Chitosane substrate to an immunocompetent reconstructed skin. Biomed Mater Eng
2006; 16(4):S85–S94.
51. Taherzadeh O, Otto WR, Anand U, et al. Influence of human skin injury on regeneration of sensory
neurons. Cell Tissue Res 2003; 312(3):275–280.
52. Auger FA, Berthod F, Moulin V, et al. Tissue-engineered skin substitutes: from in vitro constructs to in
vivo applications. Biotechnol Appl biochem 2004; 39:263–275.
53. Hudon V, Berthod F, Black AF, et al. A tissue-engineered endothelialized dermis to study the
modulation of angiogenic and angiostatic molecules on capillary-like tube formation in vitro. Br J
Dermatol 2003; 148(6):1094–1104.
54. Tausche AK, Skaria M, Bohlen L, et al. An autologous epidermal equivalent tissue-engineered from
follicular outer root sheath keratinocytes is as effective as split-thickness skin autograft in recalcitrant
vascular leg ulcers. Wound Repair Regen 2003; 11(4):248–252.
55. Bacqueville D, Mavon A. Comparative analysis of solar radiation-induced cellular damages between
ex vivo porcine skin organ culture and in vitro reconstructed human epidermis. In revision to Int
J Cosmet Sci 2008.
56. Baschong W, Artmann C, Hueglin D, et al. Direct evidence of bioconversion of vitamin E acetate into
vitamin E: an ex vivo study in viable human skin. J Cosmet Sci 2001; 52:155–161.
57. Matsumura Y, Ananthaswamy HN. Toxic effects of ultraviolet radiation on the skin. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 2004; 195:298–308.
58. Rabe JH, Mamelak AJ, McElgunn PJ, et al. Photoaging: Mechanisms and repair. J Am Acad Dermatol
2006; 55:1–19.
59. Raj D, Brash DE, Grossman D. Keratinocyte apoptosis in epidermal development and disease. J Invest
Dermatol 2006; 126:243–257.
60. Young AR, Sheehan JM, Chadwick CA, et al. Protection by ultraviolet A and B sunscreens against in
situ dipyrimidine photolesions in human epidermis is comparable to protection against sunburn.
J Invest Dermatol 2000; 115:37–41.
61. Liardet S, Scaletta C, Panizzon R, et al. Laurent-Applegate L. Protection against pyrimidine dimers,
p53, and 8-hydroxy-2¢-deoxyguanosine expression in ultraviolet-irradiated human skin by
sunscreens: Difference between UVB þ UVA and UVB alone sunscreens. J Invest Dermatol 2001;
117:1437–1441.
62. Bachvall H, Wassberg C, Berne B, et al. Similar UV responses are seen in a skin organ culture as in
human skin in vivo. Exp Dermatol 2002; 11(4):349–56.
Reconstructed Human Skin and Skin Organ Culture Models
355

=== Page 374 ===
34
Skin Feel Agents
Germaine Zocchi
Villers-aux-Tours, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
Skin feel additives are substances conferring sensorial properties to a skin care product,
triggering pleasant perception during application onto the skin and after use. Effectiveness
of sensory triggers is governed by their substantivity to the skin that occurs either by
hydrophobic interaction, or by electrostatic interaction, or a combination of these two factors.
A large variety of cosmetic ingredients function as skin feel/conditioning additives comprising
lipophilic materials, silicones, water-soluble polymeric substances (including proteins) and
their cationic derivatives, humectants, etc. The Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association
(CTFA) divides skin-conditioning agents into several groups: emollients, occlusive materials,
and miscellaneous substances including, among others, cationic macromolecules and various
surfactants.
This chapter focuses on skin feel agents for rinse-off products and more particularly for
surfactant-based skin-cleansing products: facial cleansers, soap and syndet bars, shower gels
and body washes, foam baths (or bubble baths), and bath oils.
Shower gels, bars, and facial cleansers first contact the skin, before being rinsed during
the cleaning process; the persistence of the conditioning agents onto the skin is crucial to
ensure sensory performances otherwise they are washed off and the end benefit is not
perceived by the user. For bath products intended to be heavily diluted for use, it is difficult for
skin feel agents to be really effective, except perhaps in case of bath oils. Indeed, when bath oils
are diluted in water, they either float at the water/air interface or lead to a coarse unstable o/w
emulsion; when the body emerges from the bath, oils spontaneously stick onto the skin
because of their water incompatibility, excluding them out of the “bathing liquor.”
The advent of emollients in body-cleansing liquids occurred with the emergence in the
early 1990s of the “body washes” referring to “2 in 1” foaming emulsions; before the
development of this new product niche, cationic polymeric materials were the most used skin-
conditioning agents in skin-cleansing products.
Sensorial performance profile of a body-cleansing product comes in a variety of signal
attributes:
l Feeling on the skin during use: spreading of the liquid (also related to product
rheology), feel of the bar (slipperiness or roughness), foam feel related to foam quality
(creaminess, density);
l Skin feel during rinsing under running water: for example, slipperiness, roughness of
the skin, “clean feel” (squeaky feel) left by soaps;
l Feel while drying the skin with a towel and feel on damp skin: softness, roughness,
stickiness; and
l After feel and long lasting of skin sensations: smoothness, softness, moisturization, etc.
All these product attributes are governed at first by the composition of the cleansing
base: the surfactant nature (amphoterics, nonionics, and anionics), their total and relative
concentrations, the clinical mildness for the skin of the surfactant mixture, etc. The sensorial
profile of the product can be further influenced or improved by judiciously chosen skin-
conditioning agents.
Besides physical, clinical, and organoleptic characteristics of the body-cleansing product,
several other imponderable parameters can act upon the skin feel performance and perception:
environmental conditions, usage habits, water hardness, skin condition of the user, pilosity,
etc.

=== Page 375 ===
Also, consumer expectations in terms of sensorial profile of a product depend on climatic
(relative humidity, temperature) and socio-demographic parameters (sex, occupation, lifestyle,
running water availability, etc.), skin type and concerned body part (face, whole body, etc.),
product positioning (sport, moisturizing, nourishing, others), etc.
Criteria of selection and technical constraints to be taken into account when choosing
skin feel agents are as follows:
l Solubility and compatibility with the surfactant system
l Sensitivity to electrolytes and pH
l Product physical form: bar, liquid
l Processability (bars) and easiness of formulation
l Sensitivity to temperature
l Impact on finished product performance profile:
l on the foam: foam feel, volume and stability, creaminess, bubble size, texture, etc.
l on the product rinseability
l induction of undesirable and unexpected secondary effects on skin feel when
skin is damp (e.g., stickiness)
l Impact on finished product esthetic:
l on base odor, fragrance character, perception, and stability
l on product clarity when relevant
l on viscosity, rheological profile
l on color
l Origin: animal or vegetal, natural, or synthetic
l Risk of skin sensitization
l Cost
EMOLLIENTS AND REFATTENERS
Introduction
CTFA dictionary defines emollients as “cosmetic ingredients which help to maintain the soft,
smooth, and pliable appearance of the skin; emollients function by their ability to remain on
the skin surface or in the stratum corneum to act as lubricant, to reduce flaking, and to improve
the appearance of the skin.”
Emollients are also described as refattening additives or refatteners in case of bath products.
The word “refattener” refers to substances improving the lipid content of the upper layers of
the skin; they prevent defattening and drying out of the skin.
Several emollients showing strong lipophilic character are identified as occlusive
ingredients; they are fatty/oily materials that remain on the skin surface and reduce
transepidermal water loss. CTFA dictionary defines “occlusives” as: “cosmetic ingredients
which retard the evaporation of water from the skin surface; by blocking the evaporative loss
of water, occlusive materials increase the water content of the skin.”
Overall, emollients and refatteners are oils and fats derived from natural origins or
obtained by chemical synthesis; they are classified as nonpolar (paraffin’s and isoparaffin’s)
and polar substances (esters and triglycerides); their chemical structure influence the
interaction with the skin surface and affect their sensorial properties. As a class, they comprise
lipids, oils and their derivatives, fatty acid esters, lanolin derivatives, and silicones and their
organo-functional derivatives.
Originally emollients were developed for use in leave-on skin care products. Formulation
technology can aid the deposition of refattening additives on the skin from wash off products
and avoid that they rinse off with the surfactants; nevertheless, the large dilution factor in bath
products remain a significant hurdle for skin end benefit perception (except in bath oils).
Emollients and refatteners will provide after feel but will also influence skin feel during
usage, foam feel, and most of the time foam quantity and quality. The more hydrophobic is the
refattening additive, the more deleterious its impact on flash foam generation, foam quantity,
and stability.
358
Zocchi

=== Page 376 ===
In other respects, the more oily/fatty the material, the better is its deposition onto the
skin and its substantivity, and the easier the efficacy documentation. Proof and substantiation
of claims is of more and more importance in the frame of European legislation for cosmetics
and toiletries and in the context of the competitive environment.
Lipophilic Emollients and Occlusives
Occlusive materials comprise among others vegetable oils, triglycerides, mineral oil, natural or
synthetic waxes, fatty acid esters, lanolin oil and its derivatives, polydimethylsiloxanes, etc.
(Table 1).
They form an occlusive layer on the skin, keeping water inside the upper stratum
corneum (SC) layers and consequently acting as moisturizers.
Mineral oil and vegetable oils as well as waxes generally produce heavy and greasy
feeling on the skin. Hydrophobic fatty acid esters are an almost unlimited source of synthetic
emollients and refatteners; they provide lighter and more pleasant skin feel than oils and
waxes. Any fatty acid can be esterified either by ethylene glycol or propylene glycol, or
Table 1
Emollients and Refatteners
INCI names
Fats/oils (triglycerides);
hydrocarbons; waxes
Petrolatum
Ceresin
Mineral oil
Wheat germ oil/wheat germ glycerides
Almond/peach oil
Coconut oil
Jojoba oil
Rape seed/olive/sesame oil
Sunflower/corn/safflower oil
Fatty acid esters:
Ethylene glycol esters
Glycol stearate, or palmitate, or oleate
hydrophobic emollient
Polyethylene glycol esters
PEG-5 octanoate
esters
PEG-5 isononate and trideceth-9
Propylene glycol esters
Propylene glycol myristate or laurate
Polypropylene glycol
esters
PPG-36 Oleate
Isopropyl esters
Isopropyl myristate, or laurate, or palmitate
Polyglyceryl esters
Polyglyceryl-10- laurate or myristate
Alkyl esters
Octyl octanoate
Cetearyl octanoate
Octyl hydroxystearate
Castoryl maleate
Fatty acid mono and
Glyceryl oleate
diglycerides
Glyceryl laurate
Ethoxylated triglycerides
PEG-6 caprylic capric triglycerides
PEG-4 caprylic/capric glycerides
PEG-45 palm kernel glycerides
PEG-20 almond glycerides
PEG-60 corn glycerides
PEG-18 palm glycerides
Olive oil PEG-7 esters
Hydroxylated milk glycerides
Ethoxylated mono and
Ethoxylated glyceryl
PEG-7 glyceryl cocoate
diglycerides: hydrophilic
esters
PEG-8 glyceryl laurate
emollient esters
PEG-15 glyceryl laurate
PEG-30 glyceryl cocoate
PEG-78 glyceryl cocoate
PEG-20 glyceryl oleate
PEG-82 glyceryl tallowate
PEG-200 glyceryl tallowate
Abbreviations: INCI, International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients; PEG, polyethylene glycol.
Skin Feel Agents
359

=== Page 377 ===
glycerin polymers, or isopropyl alcohol, or any longer chain alcohol, etc. The feel they impart
and their impact on foam is related to the fatty acid chain length; short chains (e.g., isopropyl
myristate and octyl octanoate) deliver dryer feel and have lesser impact on foam than longer
ones (e.g., stearates and isostearates) that are greasier and detrimental to foam quantity and
stability (1).
Hydrophobic emollients are efficacious skin refatteners but not easy to incorporate in
surfactant mixtures commonly used in liquid skin-cleansing products. They must be
emulsified that most of the time necessitates hot process. They have a detrimental impact
on foam speed, quantity, and stability. In order to circumvent this weakness of lathering
capacity, manufacturers sometimes provide a mechanical foaming device with the body-
cleansing product: a puff or massage flower (2).
Highly hydrophobic refattening additives are not meant for foaming preparations but
rather for bath oils. Soaps and syndet bars can easily accommodate waxes and oils without
impairing their basic foaming and cleaning functions. Besides beeswax, petrolatum or ceresin,
lanolin and jojoba oil, cocoa butter or mineral oil are other examples of skin conditioners
commonly used in bars. Paraffin wax is often used in soaps and syndets not only for the
smooth feel they impart to the finished bar and the mildness they bring to the formulation but
also for the role of plasticizer they play, adding firmness to the bar. Vegetal oils are included as
skin nourishing/refattening agents (e.g., almond, wheat germ, olive oils).
Fatty acid mono and diglycerides (1,3) are prepared either by transesterification of
triglycerides with glycerin or reaction of alkanoates with glycerin. Lipophilic character remains
predominant in these esters; depending on chain length, they are soluble in surfactant
solutions or they must be emulsified. Besides the improved skin feel they induce, they also
reduce defatting of the skin possibly caused by surfactant-based cleansers. Monoglycerides of
stearic, lauric, and palmitic acids (glyceryl mono stearate, laurate, and palmitate) are part of
the composition of natural lipids of the skin. They adsorb and can be detected on skin after
application through a skin-cleansing product (4).
Several mixtures of monoglycerides and mild foaming surfactants are commercially
available; they claim improved foam qualities (bubble sizes, creaminess, and stability) and
documentable skin-refattening properties (5,6). On top of skin feel improvement, they also
reduce degreasing effect of cleansers, thanks to their lipophilic character, and improve the
compatibility of the surfactants with the skin (1). An example of improvement in the skin
barrier function and in skin tactile sensations has been demonstrated for glyceryl oleate in a
model shower gel composition (5).
Hydrophilic Lipids
Hydrophilic lipids are (Table 1) (1) preferred for foaming skin-cleansing preparations.
Ethoxylation and propoxylation make lipids more compatible with water and more easily
soluble in aqueous surfactants solutions.
One has to find the right balance between ethoxylation and skin substantivity: the more
the lipids are ethoxylated, the more they are soluble and the less the impact on foam but also
the less their persistence on the skin, the weaker their refattening properties.
Ethoxylated glycerides are obtained either by reaction of natural triglycerides with ethylene
oxide (a complex end mixture is then obtained) or by ethoxylation of monoglycerides. They are
often referred to as “water soluble vegetable oils”; their solubility in water will depend on the
carbon chain length of starting glycerides and on the degree of ethoxylation.
Low ethoxylates triglycerides are still enough lipophilic to provide good refattening
properties, leading to very pleasant skin feel, perceivable at quite high use levels.
Ethoxylated mono and diglycerides generally associate various properties beneficial to the
skin. They are more or less refattening the skin, depending on chain length and ethoxylation
ratio. They act as anti-irritant or mildness additives and confer slipperiness to the foam.
Depending on chain length and ethoxylation degree they are either water dispersible or
soluble. Among the low ethoxylates monoglycerides, PEG-7 glyceryl cocoate is one that is
mostly used. This emollient depresses skin irritation induced by anionic surfactants and shows
minimum impact on lathering profile. Higher ethoxylates of longer carbon chain length (PEG-
200 glyceryl tallowate) are still substantive to the skin because of their high-molecular weight;
they provide a smooth feel, but because of their stronger hydrophilic character, their refatting
properties are less obvious to evidence (7).
360
Zocchi

=== Page 378 ===
Ethoxylated/propoxylated fatty alcohols are useful light emollients: through an appropriate
selection of optimum combination between parent alcohol chain length and propoxylation/
ethoxylation degree, these emollients can be formulated up to 2% to 3% in surfactant solutions
with minimum impact on foam volume.
Lanolin
Lanolin is extracted from sheep wool grease; it is a complex mixture of esters of high-
molecular-weight lanolin alcohols (aliphatic alcohols, sterols, and trimethyl sterols) and of
lanolin fatty acids. Free lanolin alcohols, acids, and lanolin hydrocarbons are minors. Lanolin
alcohols and lanolin oil are recommended as superfatting agents in soaps. Ethoxylation of the
hydroxyl groups of lanolin or of its derivatives leads to hydrophilic, water-soluble lanolin
compounds, offering a broad range of useful emollients to the formulator (Table 2) (8,9). Some
moderately to highly ethoxylated derivatives, recommended for their good emolliency and
moisturization properties, are processable in liquid skin cleansers with limited impact on foam
profile; as an example, the 75 moles ethoxylated lanolin does not depress foam and is
recommended as skin conditioner in soaps, liquid body-cleansing products, and bubble baths.
Medium ethoxylates lanolin alcohols have limited impact on foam performances of body-
cleansing liquids; lower ethoxylates can be formulated in bars. Propoxylated lanolin alcohols are
lipophilic emollients used in soap bars and in other cleansers on the basis of synthetic
surfactants.
Alkoxylated lanolin derivatives are obtained by reaction with mixtures of propylene and
ethylene oxides in various ratios; they are more soluble than ethoxylated lanolin. They serve as
refattening and foam-stabilizing agents.
Esterification of lanolin fatty acid with isopropyl alcohol provides a range of esters of
various molecular weights. Medium-molecular-weight esters are used as superfattening agents
in soaps.
The use of animal-derived ingredients in cosmetics is regulated in Europe. Lanolin is part
of those ruminant-derived ingredients considered as noninfective with regard to BSE,
according to World Health Organization (WHO).
Lecithin
Lecithin (Table 2) is a natural mixture of polar and neutral lipids; the word “lecithin” is also
used as the trivial name of a particular phospholipid: phosphatidylcholine.
Main vegetable sources of lecithin used in personal care products are soybean and
maize; egg yolk is practically the only animal source of lecithin used in cosmetics and
toiletries. The percentage of polar lipids and their fatty acid pattern are characteristic of the
lecithin source.
Bare lecithin, a secondary product of soybean oil extraction, typically contains 60% to
70% polar lipids (mainly phospholipids, namely phosphatidylcholine and glycolipids), and a
Table 2
Emollients and Refatteners
INCI names
Lecithin
Propylene glycol (and) lecithin (and) sodium lauryl sulfate
(and) disodium sulfosuccinate (and) cocamidopropyl
hydroxysultaine (and) isopropyl alcohol
Lanolin and its
Lanolin oil
derivatives
Lanolin alcohol
Ethoxylated lanolin
PEG-75 lanolin
Ethoxylated lanolin alcohols
Laneth-16
Laneth-25
Propoxylated lanolin
alcohols
PPG-30 lanolin alcohol ether
PPG-12 PEG-50 lanolin
Alkoxylated lanolin
PPG-40 PEG-60 lanolin oil
Abbreviations: INCI, International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients; PPG, polypropylene glycol; PEG,
polyethylene glycol.
Skin Feel Agents
361

=== Page 379 ===
remaining, 25% to 35% soybean oil. This raw lecithin is further fractionated, purified, and
chemically modified to allow easier processing and formulation in toiletries products.
Emollient, refattening, and moisturizing properties of lecithin are guided by its content in
phospholipids.
Lecithin softens, nourishes, and refattens the skin; it provides a nongreasy, long-lasting
skin feel and improves foam feel and quality (creaminess, slipperiness, richness).
Ready to use mixtures of phospholipids in surfactant solutions, free of residual soybean
oil, are commercially available for an easy incorporation in liquids or bars; some of these
compounds allow formulation of clear products.
Silicone Derivatives
Only major materials used in body-cleansing products will be briefly discussed here (10,11).
Predominant silicones used overall in personal care products are polydimethyl siloxane
also named dimethicones. They are not soluble in water or in surfactant solutions; their
incorporation into liquid cleansers requires an emulsification process. The length of
dimethylsiloxane polymer chain dictates its molecular weight and hence its viscosity. Most
commonly used materials have viscosity ranging from about hundred to several thousands
centistokes. High- to medium-molecular-weight dimethicones are occlusive, skin protective
emollients; lower molecular weights are dryer emollients, generally preferred for use in skin
cleansers. Dimethicones have detrimental effect on foam profile but are good film-forming
agents, lubricant, imparting a nongreasy, nontacky, and silky feel as compared with “heavier”
mineral or vegetable oils. They are used in soap bars, where they also aid mold release, and in
2-in-1 shower gels (foaming emulsion body washes). More recently, emulsions of ultra high-
molecular-weight silicone were developed that are easily incorporated in aqueous systems
such as body washes and facial cleansers; they impart soft residual film, moisturized skin feel
even from a rinse-off product.
Polymethylcyclosiloxanes or cyclomethicones are tetrameric or pentameric oligomers of
the same backbone as polydimethylsiloxane and show the same chemical and physical
properties; they are low viscosity fluids with relatively high volatility because of their low
molecular weight and the weak intermolecular attractivity. Because they are not substantive,
cyclomethicones are often identified as dry emollients; they deliver light, transient, and dry
skin feel during product use.
Formulation of these nonpolar insoluble silicones requests hot emulsification process
(nonionic emulsifiers) and proper emulsion stabilization.
Dimethicones are modified or functionalized with other organic groups to modulate
their solubility in water or in surfactant solutions (and consequently make them easier to
formulate) and their skin substantivity properties. By adjusting the type and proportion of
hydrophilic substituents, the resulting copolymer is soluble or dispersible in aqueous cosmetic
products. The combination of the dimethicone structure with polyoxyalkylated substituents
(ethylene or propylene oxide) yields dimethicone copolyols: copolymers more soluble in water
with surface activity. They are foam boosters and stabilizers; even if they are less film forming
than parent polydimethylsiloxanes, they significantly participate to skin sensations during
application (use) and provide excellent smooth and silky after feel (12). They can be used to
formulate clear aqueous products.
Blends of polydimethylsiloxanes with volatile and/or water-soluble derivatives are used
to design a sensorial profile adapted to the finished product and its end use.
HUMECTANTS
CTFA dictionary defines humectants as “cosmetic ingredients intended to increase the water
content of top layers of the skin” (Table 3).
Humectants are hygroscopic substances generally soluble in water; these “moisture
attractants” maintain an aqueous film at the skin surface.
The primary humectant used in personal care products is glycerin; it tends to provide
heavy and tacky feel, which can be overcome by using it in combination with other humectants
such as sorbitol.
362
Zocchi

=== Page 380 ===
Less expensive than glycerin, propylene glycol is the second most widely used
humectant in cosmetics and toiletries products; it reduces viscosity of surfactant solutions
and tends to depress the foam.
Low-molecular-weight polyethylene glycols (PEGs from about 10–200 PEG units), amino
acids, and other constituents of skin natural moisturizing factors (NMFs) such as sodium
pyrrolidone carboxylic acid (PCA) and sodium lactate are also applicable for use in surfactant-
based skin-cleansing products.
Humectants are not substantive to the skin, they are easily rinsed-off after cleaning;
consequently, skin feel improvement is not obvious to perceive, and their efficacy in terms of
skin moisturization is difficult to document.
Glycerin, propylene glycol, 1,3-butylene glycol, or sorbitol are typically used in body
washes, bubbles baths, shower gels, or soaps to prevent the desiccation of the product itself
and the formation of a dry layer (a skin) at the surface. They also ensure stability and clarity of
liquid cleansers at cold temperatures.
Few substantive humectants can be mentioned. They are cationic in nature, which makes
them adsorbing to the negatively charged skin surface. In the quaternized polyalkoxylated
methyl glucose derivative (lauryl methyl gluceth-10 hydroxypropyldimonium chloride), the
hydrophilic moiety delivers humectant properties; the hydrophobic chain at the cationic end of
the molecule ensures both substantivity and skin conditioning.
Another example is chitosan-PCA; it is a polycationic (at acidic pH) high-molecular-
weight polymer produced by deacetylation of chitin, the major constituent of invertebrate
exoskeletons. Combining chitosan with PCA leads to a highly substantive, film-forming
humectant material.
POLYMERS
Polymeric materials can interact both with protein of skin surface and with skin lipids.
Parameters influencing the interaction between skin surface and polymers are as follows:
l The positive charge density: the more cationic the character of the polymer, the better
the polymer interaction with negatively charged skin surface.
l The hydrophobicity of polymer: grafting of fatty moieties on the polymer backbone
favors hydrophobic interactions with hydrophobic areas of the keratin.
l The molecular weight of the polymer: the higher the polymer size, the more its
substantivity to the skin (film-forming properties). However, very low-molecular-
weight polymers can easily penetrate the skin surface chinks and as such adsorb into
the superficial stratum disjunctum.
Table 3
Humectants
Humectants
INCI names
Glycerin
Glycereth-26 and glycereth-7
Propylene glycol
1,3 butylene glycol
PEG-8 to about PEG-200
Sorbitol
Sorbeth-6 to sorbeth-40
Xylitol
Ethoxylated methyl glucose
Methyl gluceth -10/methyl gluceth-20
Amino acids
Lactic acid/sodium lactate
Sodium PCA
Substantive conditioning
Steardimonium panthenol
humectants
Lauryl methyl gluceth-10 hydroxypropyl dimonium chloride
Chitosan-PCA
Abbreviations: INCI, International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients; PCA, pyrrolidone carboxylic acid;
PEG, polyethylene glycol.
Skin Feel Agents
363

=== Page 381 ===
l The nature of surfactants surrounding the polymer in the finished product: the
polymer can interact with surfactants either through their charges or through
hydrophobic interactions; also competition between polymer and surfactants for
skin-anchoring sites can occur. In both cases, deposition and adsorption of polymer
onto the skin surface is weakened.
Natural Polymers and Their Chemically Modified Derivatives
Proteins
Proteins differ by (i) the source; (ii) the molecular weight; (iii) the amino acids (AA)
composition, AA side groups, and electrical charge (more of cationic or of anionic AA); and
(iv) the chemically attached moieties (quats, fatty chains, silicone, etc.) on the peptide backbone
(Table 4) (13–15).
Proteins can be from vegetable or animal origin. The use of animal-derived ingredients in
cosmetics is regulated in Europe because of the emergence of BSE infection in ruminants.
Hydrolyzed proteins, among other collagens, are considered as safe in cosmetics provided that
the supplier implements and certifies the application of an adequate production process.
Collagen from pork or beef is still one of the most widely used animal proteins; “marine
collagen” (fish) is used as alternative source of collagen to traditional bovine-derived materials.
Milk proteins, keratin, and elastin are also considered in cosmetics and toiletries. Concerns
related to BSE have initiated a shift away from animal-derived ingredients and an increased
interest in plant-derived proteinic materials.
Vegetable/plant proteins are most of the time associated with significant amounts of
soluble and insoluble carbohydrates because of extraction process; soluble carbohydrates
confer dark color and strong odor to the raw material; in some commercial grades
carbohydrates have been removed. The combination of hydrolyzed vegetable proteins and
oligosaccharides produces conditioning additives with synergistic moisturizing action and
Table 4
Natural Polymers and their Chemically Modified Derivatives
INCI names
Native proteins
Solubilized in anionic
surfactants
Native wheat protein/lauryl ether sulfate complex
Protein hydrolyzates
Animal source
Hydrolyzed animal protein
Hydrolyzed collagen
Hydrolyzed milk protein
Plant derived
Hydrolyzed vegetal protein
Hydrolyzed wheat protein/oligosaccharide complex
Hydrolyzed wheat protein and hydrolyzed wheat
starch
Hydrolyzed oats
Hydrolyzed wheat gluten
Quaternized protein
hydrolyzates
Animal source
Hydroxypropyl trimonium–hydrolyzed collagen
Plant derived
Hydroxypropyl trimonium–hydrolyzed wheat protein
Fatty side chains grafted on
protein backbone
Native protein
Wheat extract (and), stearic (and), sodium chloride
Quaternized fatty chains
grafted
Protein hydrolyzate
Steardimonium-hydrolyzed wheat protein or
collagen
Lauryl or cocodimonium hydroxypropyl–hydrolyzed
collagen
Alkyl quaternary–hydrolyzed soya protein
Copolymers
Protein-PVP
Hydrolyzed wheat protein/polyvinyl pyrrolidone
copolymer
Protein-Silicone
Hydrolyzed wheat protein hydroxypropyl
polysiloxane copolymer
Quaternized copolymer
Hydroxypropyl trimonium–hydrolyzed wheat protein
polysiloxane copolymer
Abbreviations: INCI, International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients; PVP, polyvinyl pyrrolidone.
364
Zocchi

=== Page 382 ===
film-forming properties. Major vegetal starting materials are wheat gluten, almond meal, rice,
oat, soy, maize, etc.
Proteins are functional over a wide range of pH; nevertheless, as they are amphoteric
materials, below their isoelectric point they carry a net positive charge, which makes them
substantive to the negatively charged skin surface.
Film-forming properties of proteins and hydrolyzates are related to their molecular
weight (the higher, the better). Overall, proteins convey smoothing and moisturizing effect,
they produce soft and silky feel to the skin. They have positive effect on foam profile: they
increase foam stability, creaminess, and density as well as confer slipperiness to the foam.
Proteins and hydrolyzates are also known for their ability to reduce the irritation caused
by anionic surfactants and to combat skin dryness induced by detergents (16–19).
Some native proteins such as elastin, keratin, or vegetable proteins are insoluble. There
exists soluble native collagen species; their use is restricted to some specialized applications. In
order to make native proteins suitable for a wide range of applications, they are converted into
soluble hydrolyzates by chemical or enzymatic degradation. The sizes of resulting peptides
depend on the hydrolysis process used: chemical processes give rise to broader-molecular-
weight distributions and enzymatic digestion to narrower ones. Besides that, native proteins
solubilized in various anionic surfactants (by formation of a protein-surfactant complex), are
commercially available, allowing easy formulation of these film forming, moisturizing, skin
mildness additives.
A wide range of protein hydrolyzates molecular weights is available, ranging from
500,000 down to 1000 Da. Protein hydrolyzates of intermediate molecular weight (average
3000–5000 Da) are the most widely used; they are less substantive than high-molecular-weight
proteins but still provide smooth skin feel, slippery feel during use, and sensation of skin
hydration.
Hydrolyzates are readily soluble and compatible with all classes of surfactants.
Most of commercially available proteins and derivatives have characteristic odor and
color. Furthermore, products formulated with proteins or hydrolyzates should be adequately
preserved.
Chemically Modified Protein Derivatives
In order to increase interaction of proteinic material with skin surface, proteins or hydrolyzates
are functionalized or chemically modified (Table 4). Protein possesses reactive side chain
amino and carboxyl groups, which are sites for further modification of their intrinsic
properties.
Hydrophobic interactions with the skin surface are favored and reinforced by grafting
fatty carbon chains; ionic interactions are maximized by grafting cationic moieties onto the
protein backbone.
Hydrolyzed protein copolymers combine substantivity and film-forming properties of
parent proteins with characteristic sensorial properties of companion conditioning agents;
these macromolecular proteinic complexes offer greater moisturizing and conditioning
potential as compared with the individual components (20).
1.
Native proteins coupled with fatty acids lead to macromolecular entity with dual
hydrophilic/hydrophobic characteristics and physicochemical properties. Skin
substantivity is guided both by the size of the starting protein and by the chain
length (the hydrophobicity) of the fatty acid. The macromolecules are surface active
and can be formulated in bars or liquids; they produce smooth long-lasting skin feel.
Long chain fatty acid derivatives tend to decrease foam volume but confer
creaminess, richness, and slipperiness to the lather.
2.
Copolymers of silicone and proteins are obtained by covalent bonding of low-molecular-
weight polydimethylsiloxanes on amino groups of (vegetable) protein hydrolyzate.
They combine beneficial properties of proteins (anti-irritant effect, substantivity, film
forming, soft after feel) with lubricity of silicone (21,22). Quaternized protein–silicone
copolymers are also commercially available.
3.
PVP-protein copolymers: proteinic component imparts substantivity and polyvinyl
pyrrolidone (PVP) maximizes the moisture retention and film-forming properties of
Skin Feel Agents
365

=== Page 383 ===
the resulting copolymer. PVP/protein ratio will modulate the profile of performance
on the skin and the influence on lathering characteristics of surfactant-based skin
cleanser.
4.
Quaternized protein hydrolyzates: cationic protein hydrolyzates are obtained by
reaction of the primary amine sites on the protein backbone with a tertiary amine:
hydroxypropyl or propyl trimethyl ammonium or alkyl trimethyl ammonium (23).
Covalent attachment of quaternary groups strongly increases the cationic
character of the protein hydrolyzate, making it further skin substantive and resistant
to rinsing with water.
Covalent attachment of fatty quaternary groups (alkyl dimethyl ammo-
nium) on peptides greatly enhances both ionic and hydrophobic interactions with the
skin. Alkyl chain can be lauryl, myristyl, and stearyl. Alkyl trimonium-hydrolyzed
proteins are still water soluble and compatible with all classes of surfactants. These
hydrophobically modified cationic protein hydrolyzates are highly adsorbing to skin
surface at all pH levels and offer skin substantivity at minimum concentration. They
impart pronounced conditioning effect; the lipophilic moieties provide emollient feel.
Overall, quaternized versions of a protein are many times more substantive
than the parent protein hydrolyzate. Quaternization of protein hydrolyzates raises
their isoelectric point (IP) to pH 10 regardless of their initial IP values.
Cationic Guar Gum
Guar gum is a galactomannan polysaccharide derived from the endosperm of cyamopsis
tetragonolobus seeds (Table 5).
Depolymerization of the gum by enzymatic or chemical processes allows to modulate its
molecular weight and consequently to impact its solubility, thickening properties, and the
transparency of the finished product. Free hydroxyl groups on the polysaccharidic backbone
can participate in esterification and etherification reactions. Hydroxypropyl (HP) side groups
improve guar compatibility with electrolytes. Cationic guar derivatives are obtained by
reaction of HP guar with epoxypropyltrimethyl ammonium chloride; positive charge density
of resulting guar hydroxypropyl trimonium chloride depends on substitution degree. Cationic
guar derivatives are film forming and impart soft, smooth, and silky feel to the skin; moreover
Table 5
Natural Polymers and their Chemically Modified Derivatives
INCI names
Comments
Cationic cellulose
derivatives
Polyquaternium 10
Polymeric quaternary ammonium salt of HEC
reacted with trimethyl ammonium-substituted
epoxide
Polyquaternium 24
Polymeric ammonium salt of HEC reacted with
lauryl dimethyl ammonium-substituted
epoxide; average degree of substitution=1
Polyquaternium 67
Polymeric quaternary ammonium salt of HEC
reacted with a trimethyl ammonium-
substituted epoxide and a lauryl dimethyl
ammonium-substituted epoxide
PG-hydroxyethyl cellulose lauryl
or coco or stearyl dimonium
chloride
Average degree of substitution>1
Cationic guar
derivatives
Guar hydroxypropyl trimonium
chloride
Hydroxypropyl guar hydroxypropyl
trimonium chloride
Cationic phospholipid
polymer
Polyquaternium 64
Cationic phospholipid polymer with
phosphorylcholine moiety
Abbreviations: INCI, International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients; HEC, hydroxyethyl cellulose.
366
Zocchi

=== Page 384 ===
they act as anti-irritant for anionic surfactants and soaps and have positive effect on foam feel
and quality (24,25).
Cationic Cellulose Derivatives
Polyquaternium 10 is a range of polymeric quaternary ammonium salts of hydroxyethyl
cellulose (HEC) reacted with trimethyl ammonium-substituted epoxide. Polyquaternium 10 solutions
are non-Newtonian and are commercially available (i) in several viscosity grades depending on
their molecular weight (they contribute to viscosity of formulations) and (ii) with “high” to
“moderate” cationic substitution. In vivo tests showed that these cationic cellulosic polymers
protect the skin from aggression by anionic surfactants (Table 5) (26,27).
Polyquaternium 24 is a polymeric quaternary ammonium salt of HEC reacted with
lauryldimethyl ammonium-substituted epoxide; it is a hydrophobically modified polyquaternium 10.
The degree of substitution with quaternary fatty chain is average one in polyquaternium
24; a range of alkyl dimonium hydroxypropyl oxyethyl cellulose with higher proportion of
grafted cationic fatty groups (average degree of substitution is 1.2) is also commercially
available.
Polyquaternium 67 is high-viscosity quaternized hydroxyethylcellulose incorporating
variations in charge level and hydrophobic modification. This family of cationic cellulosic
conditioning polymers combines the trimethyl ammonium functionality of polyquaternium
10 with various levels of dimethyl-dodecyl-ammonium hydrophobic functionality. Their degree of
cationic substitution has been fixed at ~0.2, which corresponds to a weight-percentage nitrogen
of ~1%. Low levels of hydrophobic dimethyl-dodecyl-ammonium substitution (HS=0.01) were
used to impart hydrophobic character to the polyquaternium 10-type polymers. Four polymer
grades are available ranging from the lowest to the higher degree of hydrophobic substitution.
The whole range enables crystal clear formulations.
The presence of fatty side chains on all these quaternized cellulose ethers makes them
surface active and further participates to their very high skin substantivity and film-forming
properties. They impart silky smooth after feel.
These alkyl quaternary cellulose polymers are soluble in water (longer carbon chains
must be slightly warmed) and compatible with a wide range of surfactants; they have
favorable influence on the lathering properties providing creaminess, density, slipperiness,
and stability to the foam.
Synthetic Quaternized Polymers
An array of dimethyldiallylammoniumchloride (DMDAAC)-based polymers and copolymers
are commercially available. Their substantivity, film-forming properties, and resulting skin
feel depend on both the molecular weight (ranging from about 400,000–7 millions) and the
density of positive charges, which also dictates the compatibility of the polymer with anionic
surfactants. These polymers generally make foam denser and more stable (Table 6) (28).
DMDAAC homopolymer (polyquaternium 6) carries the highest positive charge density
and is not compatible with anionic surfactants.
Table 6
Synthetic Quaternized Polymers
INCI names
Polyquaterniums
Polyquaternium 6
Dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride homopolymer
Polyquaternium 7
Acrylamide/dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride copolymer
Polyquaternium 11
Poly(vinylpyrrolidone/dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate)
Polyquaternium 22
Acrylic acid/dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride copolymer
Polyquaternium 39
Acrylamide/acrylic acid/dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride
terpolymer
Polyquaternium 70
Polymeric quaternary ammonium salt consisting of an
ethoxylated propoxylated stearyl amine condensed with
adipic and dilinoleic acid,quaternized with dimethyl sulfate
Abbreviation: INCI, International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients.
Skin Feel Agents
367

=== Page 385 ===
Inclusion of acrylamide into DMDAAC homopolymer decreases the positive charge
density, leading to a skin-conditioning polymer more compatible with anionics (polyquater-
nium 7) (29,30). Polyquaternium 7 is probably one of the most widely used synthetic cationic
polymer in body-cleansing products; it is highly substantive to the skin, delivering soft, silky,
moisturized after feel (28).
Positive charge density is also decreased by copolymerizing DMDAAC with either
acrylic acid (polyquaternium 22) or with both acrylamide and acrylic acid (polyquaternium 39).
Another widely used synthetic cationic polymer in liquid skin cleansers and in bar soaps is a
quaternized copolymer of PVP and dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEM) (polyquater-
nium 11). This PVP copolymer is available in molecular weights ranging from 100,000 to 10,00,000.
SURFACTANTS
Benefits brought by additional skin-conditioning agents are sometimes hidden by a mild or
very mild cleaning surfactant system delivering by itself very good skin feel properties; the
sensorial baseline is high to start with, and the increment in performance brought by skin feel
agent is leveled off, and sometimes even not perceivable (Table 7).
Table 7
Surfactants
INCI names
Nonionics
Polyhydric alcohol esters
Sucrose esters
Sucrose laurate or cocoate
Methyl glucose esters
PEG-120 methyl glucose dioleate
PEG-80 methyl glucose laurate
Glucose ethers
Alkyl polyglucosides
Fatty acid alkanolamides
Cocodiethanolamide
Amphoterics
Ampholytes
Cocamidopropyl betaine
Olivamidopropyl betaine
Sesamidopropyl betaine
Isostearamidopropyl betaine
Cocamidopropyl hydroxysultaine
Cocamidopropyldimethyl aminohydroxypropyl
hydrolyzed collagen
Dimethicone propyl PG-betaine
Propionates
Alkylamino propionates
Alkyliminodipropionates
Imidazoline derivatives
Acylamphoacetate
Anionics
Phosphoric acid esters and salts
C9-C15 alkyl phosphate
PPG-5 ceteth-10 phosphate
Oleth-3 phosphate
Acyl amino acids and salts
Acyl peptides
Sodium cocoyl hydrolyzed protein
Sodium lauroyl oat amino acids
TEA or sodium lauroyl animal collagen amino acids
Acyl glutamates
Sodium cocoyl glutamate
Sarcosinates
Sodium cocoyl or lauroyl sarcosinate
Taurates
Sodium methyl cocoyl taurate
Sulfonic acids and salts
Sulfosuccinates
Disodium laneth-5 sulfosuccinate
Disodium ricinoleamido MEA-sulfosuccinate
Disodium laureth sulfosuccinate
Disodium PEG-8 palm glycerides sulfosuccinate
Isethionates
Sodium cocoyl isethionate
Carboxylates
Alkyl glucose carboxylate
Sodium PEG-7 olive oil carboxylate
Abbreviations: INCI, International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients; PPG, polypropylene glycol; PEG,
polyethylene glycol.
368
Zocchi

=== Page 386 ===
It is, however, important to notice that several mild anionic and most of the nonionic
surfactants, if they provide a pleasant after feel, are characterized by a “water feel” (feel in
solution) often unpleasant, with rough and drag feel sensations.
Amphoteric surfactants are amino acid derivatives, and their net charge varies with the pH
in solution; at pH below the IP, they are positively charged in aqueous solution and can
consequently adsorb more easily onto the skin. Alkyl chain length also significantly acts on the
skin feel; some betaines based on C16/C18 cuts provide greasier refattened feel, but also have
detrimental effect on foam. Polydimethylsiloxane grafted with a betaine moiety leads to an
amphoteric surfactant combining substantivity, refattening properties, as well as silicone
typical skin feel profile.
Some nonionics are used for their emollient properties and excellent after feel: sucrose
and methyl glucose esters as well as sucrose ethers are mentioned as examples. Fatty acid
alkanolamides are often referred to as refatteners; these are not lipids but they confer a greasy
slippery feel to the foam and impart a particular after feel on the skin, which subjectively
compares to refattening.
Several mild anionic surfactants are known to provide improved skin feel (after feel) by
themselves: sarcosinate, taurate, acylglutamate, and isethionate are cited as examples. Fatty
acids-protein condensate salts and also act as a conditioning aid imparting a pleasant smooth
feel to the skin. The inclusion of fatty acids in soap and syndet bars contributes to enhance skin
feel during and after use and produce creamier lather. Phosphoric acid fatty esters deliver
soap-like skin feel: slipperiness during use and very good rinseability, leaving skin feeling
“clean” and powdery like after feel.
EXFOLIATING AGENTS
Skin scrub agents or body polishers are solid materials from natural origin (clay, fine powder
of seeds or shells of different vegetables) or obtained by chemical synthesis (tiny beads of
styrene or polyethylene) (Table 8). When the scrub agent containing body-cleansing product is
rubbed or massaged onto the skin, fine solid particles remove superficial skin horny layer by
mechanical abrasion, leaving behind a fresh smooth skin surface. They are the easiest additives
for the consumer to perceive. Scrubbing particles can be suspended in liquid body cleanser,
thanks to structuring polymers such as xanthan gum or carraghenan, which build a
viscoelastic network in the surfactant matrix. The scrubbing agent must be very carefully
selected when formulating facial cleansers. Skin of the face is more sensitive or delicate than
the rest of the body. For facial application, formulator should orientate his choices toward soft
clays or melting jojoba beads for example.
CONCLUSIONS
The overall skin feel profile provided by a skin-cleansing product is conditioned by the huge
variety of composition constituents. Many of them have been described in this chapter, but not
exhaustively. Other factors can influence the sensations perceived by the consumer such as the
presence of electrolytes, or of thickening polymers in the product as well as the water hardness
in the user dwelling. It will be the responsibility of the formulator to consider all the potential
synergisms or antagonisms in his finished product in order to deliver the desired skin feel.
Table 8
Exfoliants/Scrubbing Agents
Apricot/walnut shells powder or flour
Corn cob
Jojoba beads
Polyethylene/styrene beads
Almond meal
Apricot/peach seed powder
Loofah
Maize scape powder
Kaolin
Skin Feel Agents
369

=== Page 387 ===
REFERENCES
1. Domsch A. Modern bath and shower preparations under dermatological aspects. Seife O¨ le Fette
Wachse 1991; 15:573–576.
2. Gordon G, Schoenberg CO, Winder LC, inventors; The Procter & Gamble Company, assignee.
Personal cleansing system comprising a polymeric diamond-mesh sponge and a liquid cleanser with
moisturizer. US patent 5 804 539, 1998.
3. Herbe JF. Produits d’hygie`ne: les tendances. Parfums Cosme´t Aroˆmes 1993; 18(113):37–41.
4. Domsch A. Ru¨ckfettung in bade-und-duschpra¨paraten. Seifen O¨ le Fette Wache 1986; 112:163–167.
5. Gassenmeier T, Busch P, Hensen H, et al. Some aspects of refatting the skin: effects oriented to skin
lipids for improving skin properties. Cosmet Toilet 1998; 113(9):89–92.
6. Both W, Gassenmeier T, Hensen H, et al. Parfum Cosmet Actual 1998; 23(142):63–65.
7. Fuller JG. Ethoxylated mono and diglycerides in skin and hair care applications. In: the 15th IFSCC
International Congress; London 1988; Vol A, paper A5: 43–55.
8. Barnett G. Lanolin and derivatives. Cosmet Toilet 1986; 101(3):23–44.
9. Whalley GR. Take a closer look at lanolin. Household and Personal Products Ind 1998; 36(5):115–118.
10. Wendel SR. Utilisation des silicones dans les cosme´tiques et produits de toilette. Parfums Cosme´t
Aroˆmes 1984; 9(59):67–68.
11. Alexander P. Oils in water. Manuf Chem 1989; 60(3):33–35.
12. Wendel SR, DiSapio AJ. Organofunctional silicones for personal care applications. Cosmet Toilet 1983;
98(5):103–106.
13. Gallagher KF. Hydrolyzed vegetable proteins: a formulator’s guide (part 1). Drug Cosmet Ind 1991;
151(8):34–66.
14. Gallagher KF, Jones RT. Hydrolyzed vegetable proteins: a formulator’s guide (part 2). Drug Cosmet
Ind 1992; 152(12):26–36.
15. Chvapil M, Eckmayer Z. Role of proteins in cosmetics. Int J Cosmet Sci 1985; 7:41–49.
16. Teglia A, Secchi G. New protein ingredient for skin detergency: native wheat protein-surfactant
complexes. Int J Cosmet Sci 1994; 16:235–246.
17. Tavss EA, Eigen E, Temnikow V, et al. Effect of protein cationicity on inhibition of in vitro epidermal
curling by alkylbenzene sulfonate. J Am Oil Chem Soc 1986; 63(4):574–579.
18. Eigen E, Weiss S, inventors; Colgate Palmolive Company, assignee. Skin protecting composition
containing a water-soluble partially degraded protein. US Patent 3 548 056, 1970.
19. Marsh RA, Mackie GJ, Hale P, inventors; The Procter & Gamble Company, assignee. Detergent
composition comprising modified proteins. US Patent 4 195 077, 1980.
20. Gallagher KF, Jones RT. Emerging technology in protein copolymerization. Cosmet Toilet 1993; 108(3):
97–104.
21. Jones R. Protein potential. Soap Perfum Cosmet 1992; 65(4):33–34.
22. Jones R. De´rive´s de prote´ines greffe´s aux silicones. Parfums Cosme´t Aroˆmes 1993; 18(109):69–71.
23. Stern ES, Johnsen VL. Cosmetic proteins: a new generation. Cosmet Toilet 1983; 98(5):76–84.
24. Marti ME. Phyto-active cosmetics. Drug Cosmet Ind 1992; 152(2):36–46.
25. Pugliese P, Hines G, Wielinga W. Skin protective properties of a cationic guar derivative. Cosmet
Toilet 1990; 105(5):105–111.
26. Faucher JA, Goddard ED, Hannan RB, et al. Protection of the skin by a cationic cellulose polymer.
Cosmet Toilet 1977; 92(6):39–44.
27. Goddard ED. Cationic cellulosic derivatives. In: Kennedy JF, Phillips GO, Williams PA, eds. Cellulosic
Chemical Biochemical and Material Aspects. London: Horwood, 1993:331–336.
28. Alexander P. Cationic polymers for skin and hair conditioning. Manuf Chem 1987; 58(7):24–29.
29. Jack S. The use of Merquat in hair and skin care. Soap Perfum Cosme 1985; 58(11):633–636.
30. Sykes R, Hammes PA. The use of Merquat polymers in cosmetics. Drug Cosmet Ind 1980; 126(2):
62–136.
370
Zocchi

=== Page 388 ===
35
Silicones—A Key Ingredient in Cosmetic
and Toiletry Formulations
Isabelle Van Reeth
Dow Corning (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China
UNIQUE MATERIALS
Silicone is a generic name for many classes of organo-silicone polymer that consist of an
inorganic siloxane (Si–O) backbone with pendant organic groups (usually methyl). It is this
structure that gives silicones their unique combination of properties and, in particular, their
surface properties (Fig. 1 and Table 1).
SILOXANE BACKBONE
The prime role of the siloxane backbone is to present the available methyl groups to their best
advantage, and it does this by virtue of its unique flexibility. In most hydrocarbons, the bond
angles are very fixed, and steric packing considerations often prevent the available methyls
from adopting the lowest surface energy orientations. In silicones, the Si–O bond length is
significantly longer, and the Si–O–Si bond angle is flatter than the comparable C–C and C–O
bonds, resulting in a very low barrier to rotation and making the polymer chains very flexible.
This flexibility makes many orientations possible and provides “free space” to accommodate
different-sized substituents or to allow easy diffusion of gaseous molecules, a property useful
in the formation of “breathable” films. Coupled with the low intermolecular forces between
methyl groups, this flexibility also has a profound effect on the bulk as well as the surface
properties of silicones, seen in the small variation of physical parameters with temperature and
molecular weight, the low freezing and pour points of fluids, the low boiling points, the high
compressibility, and the retention of liquid nature to unusually high molecular weights. It also
makes a number of structural and compositional variations possible, resulting in many
families of silicones, including linear and cyclic structures, a wide range of molecular weights,
and varying degrees of branching or cross-linking.
Additionally, the siloxane bond is exceptionally strong, providing the polymer with a
high degree of thermal and oxidative stability and ensuring the stability in formulation (1–3).
PENDANT ORGANIC GROUPS
The key function of the organic (methyl) groups is to provide the intrinsic surface activity of
the silicones. The order of increasing surface energy for single carbon-based groups is CF3 >
CF2– > CH3> CH2–. Liquid surface tension measurements show that, as expected, the
order of increasing surface activity is hydrocarbon, followed by silicone, and then by
fluorocarbon. Interfacial tension measurements against water, however, show the order of
increasing interfacial activity to be fluorocarbon, hydrocarbon, and silicone. Silicones do not fit
the simple pattern that a reduction in surface energy means an increase in hydrophobicity and
interfacial tension because of their backbone flexibility, which allows them to adopt various
orientations at different interfaces. The interfacial tension of silicone is also independent of
chain length indicating high-molecular chain freedom. In addition, the critical surface tension
of wetting values for silicones has been found to be higher than their liquid surface tension
values, meaning that they are able to spread over their own absorbed film. This has an
advantage as silicones achieve complete, uniform surface coverage, facilitate the efficient
spreading of other materials, and result in smooth, lubricating films.
In addition, because of the organic groups the solubility parameters of silicones are
significantly lower than those of water, and many organic materials make them useful in
forming barriers to wash off or wear and increase the substantivity of formulations.

=== Page 389 ===
The introduction of functional groups such as phenyl, alkyl, polyether, and amino onto
the backbone expands the properties and benefits of silicones further (1–3).
KEY INGREDIENTS IN THE COSMETICS AND TOILETRIES INDUSTRY
Silicones were first used in the cosmetics and toiletries industry in the 1950s, when low levels
of medium-viscosity dimethicone [polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)] were used to prevent the
whitening effect, characteristic of soap-based skin lotions. It was not until the 1970s when
formulators were concerned about the use of chloro fluoro carbons (CFCs) in aerosols and
silicones were considered more seriously as possible ingredients for cosmetic formulations and
their unique properties began to be recognized. Since then, the use of silicones has expanded
rapidly to virtually all segments, and today, more than 40% of all new products being
introduced into the U.S. market contain silicone, with many different types being used (4).
There are five main families of silicones that are used in the cosmetics and toiletries
industry today:
1.
Volatile siloxanes [cyclosiloxanes (ring structure) and low–molecular weight linear
PDMSs] can be used as such or blended with each other to adjust the volatility. They
are good solvents and serve as good carriers for high–molecular weight silicones that
would otherwise be very difficult to handle. In addition, they have very low heat of
vaporization compared with water or ethanol giving them a non-cooling feel when
drying. Cyclomethicones are classified as non-VOCs (volatile organic compounds) in
the United States (Fig. 2).
2.
Dimethicones (PDMSs) are linear structures with molecular weight ranging from 700
to more than 100,000. The nonvolatile dimethicones exist as fluids with viscosities of
5.0 mm2/sec up to gums. Dimethicone emulsions make handling of the higher–
molecular weight fluids easier. Specialized emulsion polymer technologies allow the
production of ultrahigh–molecular weight linear PDMS emulsions with an internal
dynamic viscosity as high as 200 million mm2/sec.
3.
Silicone blends consist of dimethiconol or dimethicone gums or trimethylsiloxysi-
licates (highly cross-linked resins) dispersed in lower–molecular weight dimethi-
cones or cyclomethicones. They have been developed to improve the ease of
formulation and compatibility of high-molecular gums or resins used for their
substantivity.
4.
Dimethicone and vinyl dimethicone cross polymers or blends are silicone elastomers,
which are cross-linked to different degrees, resulting in different product forms. They
exist in powder form, pure or coated with particles (free flowing or suspended in
water), or as elastomeric silicone gels that are swollen with solvent (usually volatile
silicone). The introduction of different functionality into such products is also
possible. They are used as rheology modifiers in skin care and antiperspirant
products, providing a dry, powdery feel to formulations (5).
5.
Functional silicones:
a. Dimethicone copolyols (silicone polyethers) are fluids or waxes in which some of
the methyl groups along the siloxane backbone have been replaced with
Figure 1
Unique chemical structure of silicones.
372
Van Reeth

=== Page 390 ===
polyoxyethylene or polyoxypropylene groups. The addition of polyoxyethylene
substituents increases the hydrophilicity of silicones. Polyoxypropylene substitu-
ents are used to balance out this hydrophilicity by increasing the hydrophobic
characteristics of the copolymer. Some of these silicone polyethers are also very
good water-in-silicone emulsifiers. The addition of alkyl chains results in a
material able to emulsify water into low to medium polarity oils.
Among these polyether-modified silicones, a special mention is necessary for
silicone carbinol fluid (bis-hydroxyethoxypropyl dimethicone) (6), a very versatile
material with good compatibility with organic materials that can act as a wetting
agent to stably disperse pigments and actives, while also providing moisturization.
b. Phenyl trimethicones are fluids in which some of the methyl groups have been
replaced by phenyl groups. The phenyl groups increase the refractive index and
improve compatibility with organic materials.
c. Amodimethicones or trimethylsilylamodimethicones are fluids in which some of
the methyl groups have been replaced by secondary and primary amine
groups. The polar amine groups have a profound effect on the deposition
properties of the silicone, giving it an affinity for negatively charged surfaces, such
as the proteinaceous surface of the hair. Emulsions of these fluids are commonly
used.
d. Alkyl dimethicones are fluids or waxes in which some of the methyl groups have
been replaced by alkyl groups. This results in a family of silicone-hydrocarbon
hybrids with possibilities for variations in viscosities, softening temperatures, and
rheological characteristics. They have increased compatibility with organic materials.
e. Silicone acrylate copolymers (acrylates/polytrimethylsiloxymetacrylates copolymer).
These film-forming copolymers can be delivered from both silicone and organic
solvents and provide enhanced durability, wash off resistance, and aesthetic
coupled with easy formulation for skin care and color cosmetic formulations (7)
SKIN CARE, SUN CARE, AND DECORATIVE PRODUCTS
Skin Feel/Emolliency
The main reason why the silicones are used in all types of skin care product is because of their
sensory properties. Studies on the emollient properties of various materials have shown that
Figure 2
Comparison of volatility
for volatile methylsiloxanes (0.1 g,
318C).
Silicones
373

=== Page 391 ===
silicones deliver greater emolliency values than many commonly used cosmetic ingredients
both during and after application. They are described as smooth, velvety, and nongreasy or
oily and are able to impart this feel to cosmetic and toiletry formulations, improving the
negative feel associated with other ingredients (8).
Volatile silicones are used for transient effects giving slight lubricity, a light texture, fast
spreading, and good distribution of the product on application, while leaving no residual
effects. They are often included in formulations to remove the greasy or oily feel of
hydrocarbon-based emollients and are the basis for “oil-free”-type claims (9). They are used in
light products for daily use such as facial cleansers, day creams, or liquid foundations. Higher–
molecular weight silicones such as dimethicone (and) dimethiconol are used to give a more
lubricious, longer-lasting effect in richer, more nourishing skin treatment products such as
night creams or after-sun products (10). Silicone elastomers are used to give a dry, powdery
feel to skin care formulations (11). Silicones are also noncomedogenic/nonacnegenic unlike
many occlusive, lipophilic fatty emollients, which can promote comedone/acne formation on
the skin (12).
Substantivity (Long Lasting/Durability)
High–molecular weight dimethicone or cyclomethicone (and) dimethiconols form water-
resistant films on the skin, which can help prolong the effects of skin care, sun care, or
decorative products. This substantivity can be improved further by using alkyl dimethicones
such as cetyl dimethicone or C30-45 alkyl methicone (Fig. 3) (13).
The use of silicones to improve the substantivity of other ingredients in cosmetic and
toiletry formulations has been demonstrated in sun care products. The addition of 2.5 wt%
cetyl dimethicone to an oil-in-water sunscreen formulation shows excellent in vivo resistance
to wash off. The formulation has a sun protection factor (SPF) of 21.1 before immersion, which
reduces to 19.2 only, after immersion for 80 minutes (14).
Volatile silicones are the basis for long-lasting/nontransfer decorative products,
especially lipsticks. They are used to disperse waxes and pigments, improve application,
and impart a pleasant skin feel, often replacing nonvolatile hydrocarbon oils. When they
evaporate, a uniform film of waxes and pigments remains, which is resistant to transfer and
wear (15).
Silicone acrylate copolymers have the ability to form non-occlusive films that resist wash
off. This film-forming property is useful in sunscreens, while in lipsticks it pairs with an
excellent sensory profile translating into improved nontransfer while maintaining very good
wearing comfort (7).
Figure 3
Substantivity of different silicones.
374
Van Reeth

=== Page 392 ===
Permeability/Controlled Moisturization/Protection Against Dehydration
Because of the flexibility of the Si–O–Si backbone, the majority of silicones are permeable to
water vapor, producing breathable films. This is an important parameter for cleansing
products or color cosmetics to avoid clogging pores. The presence of an alkyl group in the
chain, however, reduces this permeability, resulting in silicones, which can give semiperme-
able materials, e.g., cetyl dimethicone or occlusive material similar to petrolatum, e.g., C30-45
alkyl methicone (Table 1) (16).
Enhanced Efficacy
Apart from improving the feel and long-lasting benefits of skin care products, silicones can
also enhance the efficacy of other ingredients in the formulation. Studies carried out on sun
care products have shown that the alkyl methicones can enhance the SPF of products
containing either organic or inorganic sunscreens. A 2% addition level of stearyl dimethicone
into an oil-in-water silicone containing 11% of organic sunscreens resulted in an in vivo SPF of
49.7, an SPF/UVB ratio of 4.5, thus demonstrating high efficiency (17). For inorganic
sunscreens, a 100% increase in SPF was seen with an oil-in-water system containing 2 wt%
cetyl dimethicone and a 75% increase in the SPF for a water-in-oil system containing C30-45
alkyl methicone (18).
In antiaging formulations, the addition of silicone elastomer powders, at a level of 4%,
has been shown to provide wrinkle-masking benefits in addition to their unique skin feel (19).
Protection
Dimethicone is listed in the FDA (food and drug administration) Monograph for Skin
Protectant Drug Products for over the counter (OTC) Human Use in the United States. Because
of their hydrophobicity, silicones are used in protective hand creams to provide a water-
resistant barrier against waterborne contaminants. Recent studies indicate that cyclomethicone
and dimethicone may also prevent irritation caused by sunscreen agents (20).
Cleansing
The excellent spreading characteristics, dry nongreasy/oily feel, and good solvency of volatile
silicones make them ideal for use in skin cleansers to help lift and remove dirt without
stinging. They can be used alone or in combination with ingredients such as mineral oil.
Silicone emulsifiers allow low-viscosity silicone fluids to be present in the continuous phase as
well as the incorporation of polar ingredients such as water and glycerin, allowing the
formulation of rinseable foaming facial washes (21).
Volatile alkyl silicones (caprylyl methicone) were demonstrated to have superior
cleansing properties over cyclopentasiloxane and isohexadecane, ingredients often used in
biphasic makeup removers (22).
Powdered silicone elastomers have the capability of absorbing lipophilic materials such
as sebum from the skin making them very useful for greasy-skin application (19).
Water-soluble dimethicone copolyols have shown benefits in foaming facial washes.
They provide creamy, denser foam as well as improving the foam volume. In liquid body-
cleansing products such as foam baths, shower gels, and liquid soaps, they can improve
Table 1
Permeability of Different Materials Payne Cup Method
Material
Water vapor permeability g/m2/hr
Volatile silicone
152
Sunflower oil
125
Silicone gum
121
PDMS 350 cSt
107
Mineral oil
93
C18 Alkylmethylsiloxane
37
C30 Alkylmethylsiloxane
2
Petrolatum
0
Abbreviation: PDMS, polydimethylsiloxane.
Silicones
375

=== Page 393 ===
foaming and foam stabilization. They have also been recognized as additives that reduce eye
and skin irritation from anionic surfactants (23).
Emulsions of ultrahigh–molecular weight linear silicones can be perceived on the skin at
very low levels because of their very low sensory threshold (24).
Rheology Modification/Structural Integrity (Sticks)
As well as improving the aesthetics of formulations, silicones can also act as rheology
modifiers. This is particularly applicable to water-in-oil- or water-in-silicone-type systems.
One such silicone rheology modifier is the C30-45 alkyl methicone where 149% and 93%
increases in emulsion viscosity have been observed for water-in-silicone and water-in-oil
emulsions, respectively, with 2 wt% of the wax (11). Rheology modification using 2 to 4 wt%
stearyl dimethicone is believed to be part of the reason for the success of this product in
enhancing the SPF of sun care products containing organic sunscreens (17). These waxes are
also used in maintaining the structural integrity of stick products, improving their feel and
application. Silicone elastomers can also be used to modify the rheology of skin care and
antiperspirant formulations. Such elastomers have the capacity to absorb large amounts of
solvents such as cyclomethicone or low-viscosity dimethicone without exhibiting any syneresis
(extraction of a liquid from a gel). It is this property, which allows them to successfully thicken
formulations. The ability of elastomers to significantly modify the rheology of a formulation
combined with their unique powdery feel has led to their use in antiperspirant products (5).
Formulating Flexibility
Silicones can be used in all types of skin care products ranging from simple oil-in-water gels or
emulsions to water-in-silicone and water-in-oil emulsions, from crystal clear to white in color.
Silicone emulsifiers increase this flexibility further. They allow silicones to be present in the
continuous phase as well as allowing the incorporation of polar ingredients such as water and
glycerin. Matching the refractive index of the water phase with the oil phase in such emulsions
makes the formulation of clear gels possible, and adjusting the phase ratio determines the
product form from lotions to gels. This technology is the basis for the clear antiperspirant gels
seen on the market today. It is also possible to make nonaqueous emulsions using silicones to
deliver hydrophilic ingredients or those that are sensitive to hydrolysis. In addition, the
benefits of water-in-oil systems such as good sensory profiles, improved wash off resistance,
and excellent moisturization have been demonstrated. Silicone emulsifiers offer versatility for
low- or high-shear systems as well as cold processing, presenting new opportunities for cost-
effective and highly innovative skin care and underarm products (25).
HAIR CARE PRODUCTS
Hair Conditioning/Improved Combing
Various types of silicone are used to give different degrees of hair conditioning. Dimethicone
copolyols provide light conditioning due to their solubility in water and low level of
substantivity. They can also help reduce eye irritation associated with shampoos and similar
products that contain anionic surfactants (23). Higher–molecular weight dimethicones/
dimethiconols or trimethylsilylamodimethicones/amodimethicones provide a higher level of
conditioning due to their insolubility in water and greater substantivity. The latter have an
affinity for negatively charged surfaces such as the proteinaceous surface of the hair that
contributes to their substantivity.
Evaluation of the average detangling times of dimethiconol (gum), amodimethicone, and
dimethicone (high-viscosity fluid) emulsions at a 4% level in an illustrative two-in-one
shampoo formulation indicates that they all show significant improvement over the untreated
control tress with the dimethiconol emulsion providing the best conditioning effect (26).
Synergistic effects have been observed between quaternary polymers commonly used in
shampoos for conditioning and dimethicone copolyols (Fig. 4). Better detangling results are
observed for shampoos containing dimethicone copolyol and quaternary polymers than with
the quaternary polymers or dimethicone copolyols alone (27).
Similar evaluation of silicones in conditioners indicates that dimethicone emulsions
provide the best conditioning effect in rinse-off products and in permanent waving products;
376
Van Reeth

=== Page 394 ===
an emulsion of trimethylsilylamodimethicone significantly reduces the wet and dry combing
force. Combinations of silicones such as cyclomethicone, silicone blends, and phenyl
trimethicone are the basis for anhydrous leave-in conditioners, sometimes referred to as
“cuticle coat” products (26).
Sensory Enhancement
As in skin care, silicones impart a soft smooth feel to the hair. Sensory evaluations of cuticle
coat formulations consisting entirely of blends of silicone showed that, in addition to ease of
combing, they improve spreadability, silkiness and softness, gloss, and perceived repair of
split ends compared with the control (28).
Silicones as Drying Aids
Silicones such as trimethylsilylamodimethicone can help hair dry more quickly in comparison
with drying aids such as stearalkonium chloride, preventing damage due to the use of hair
dryers, and others (29,30).
Foam Boosting
Dimethicone copolyols can be used to boost the foaming properties of shampoos as well as
provide a light conditioning effect (26).
Reduced Flyaway
Tests comparing shampoo formulations containing quaternary polymers with those with
quaternary polymers and dimethicone copolyols show an improvement in static control with the
addition of the silicone. Sensory evaluation has also shown a reduction of flyaway with
dimethicone emulsions (26).
Improved Shine
Silicones, in particular phenyl trimethicone, are recognized for their ability to enhance hair
shine and gloss along with adding softness, manageability, and smoothness to the abraded
hair cuticle (26,31).
Natural-Look Fixatives
Because of their low surface tension, silicones spread easily to help fixative products distribute
evenly on the surface of hair and improve their effectiveness. They are also used in conjunction
with or as a replacement for organic plasticizers. Organic materials tend to be hydrophilic,
which diminishes the holding power of a resin. In contrast, the hydrophobic nature of silicones
Figure 4
Hand detangling results on
slightly bleached hair for diluted emulsions.
Silicones
377

=== Page 395 ===
helps repel water, so there is less opportunity to reduce the resin’s holding properties. The use
of dimethicone copolyol as a resin plasticizer can also help give hair a more natural look (26).
LONGER-LASTING PERMANENT WAVE AND COLORING PRODUCTS
Silicones, such as trimethylsilylamodimethicone, can be used to provide a more durable
conditioning effect and a longer-lasting permanent wave. Pretreatments containing silicone
blends help prevent hair damage during the harsh perming process. In hair color products,
blends of volatile and nonvolatile silicone (cyclomethicone and trimethylsilylamodimethicone)
can be used to seal the hair cuticle and hold color in. The volatile silicone evaporates, leaving
behind a smooth, uniform film on the surface of the hair (32).
Amino-functional silicones can prevent degradation of the hair color due to the
combination of UV exposure and washing and provide conditioning benefits such as ultra
shine, improved drying time, moisturization, and a smooth and light feel without negatively
impacting hair body and volume (33).
Evaluation of rinse-off conditioners indicates that silicones show excellent potential to
provide color lock properties in permanent hair color products.
HAIR STRENGTHENING
Amino functional silicones leave a medium-weight film deposited primarily at the open edges
of the cuticle, resulting in improved hair strength. Two possible mechanisms could explain this
effect (34):
l The film may protect the hair cuticle during elongation.
l The film may assist in sealing the hair cuticle, helping prevent moisture penetration
into and out the hair cortex, maintaining an optimal moisture level for hair strength.
ANTIPERSPIRANT AND DEODORANT PRODUCTS
In addition to the benefits that silicones bring to skin care products such as improved feel,
delivery of actives, low residue, and formulating flexibility, the following advantages are seen
in antiperspirant and deodorant formulations (35).
Anti-Whitening
Dimethicones, phenyl trimethicone or alkyl dimethicones have been shown to reduce/mask
the whitening effect caused by antiperspirant salts by matching the refractive index (36).
Improved Spray Characteristics
Low levels of cyclomethicone (and) dimethiconol have been demonstrated to reduce the spray
width, height, and particle size of antiperspirant pump spray and aerosol formulations,
leading to a more directional spray with low mistiness and dustiness (35,37). The silicone
blend may also contribute to the substantivity of the antiperspirant active and lubricate the
spray valve to prevent clogging.
Non-Cooling
The heat of vaporization of volatile silicones such as cyclomethicone is much lower than that of
water or ethanol meaning that much less energy is required for them to evaporate. This leads
to a non-cooling effect in formulation (35).
CONCLUSION
The multifunctional benefits of silicones make them invaluable ingredients in today’s cosmetic
and toiletry formulations, and with the introduction of more and more new silicones, this is a
trend that is expected to continue.
378
Van Reeth

=== Page 396 ===
REFERENCES
1. Owen MJ. The surface activity of silicones: a short review. Ind Eng Chem Prod Res Dev 1980; 19:
97–103.
2. Owen MJ. Why silicones behave funny. Chemtech 1981; 11:288–292.
3. DiSapio A. Silicones in Personal Care: An Ingredient Revolution. Brussels: Dow Corning Publication,
1994.
4. Source: Mintel, March 2007.
5. Starch M. New developments in Silicone Elastomers for Skin Care, Midland Michigan: Dow Corning
Publication, 2002.
6. Van Dort H, Urrutia A, Brissette G, et al. Silicone Carbinol Fluid. HAPPI magazine 2004; 77–80.
7. Van Reeth I. An overview: new silicone technologies for the skin care market. Household and
Personal Care Today. Nr.1/2007, 29–31.
8. Girboux AL, Courbon E. Enhancing the Feel of Vegetable Oils with Silicone. Cosmet Toiletr 2008; 123
(7):49–56.
9. De Backer G, Ghirardi D. Silicones: utilization in fat-free cosmetics. Parfums, Cosmet, Aromes 1993;
114:61–64.
10. Blakely J, Van Reeth I, Vagts A. The silicone difference in skincare. Inside Cosmetics; October/
November 1998; 14–17.
11. Van Reeth I, Dahman F, Lau A, et al. Novel Silicone Thickening Technologies: Delivering the
Appropriate Rheology Profile to Optimize Formulation Performance. Brussels: Dow Corning
Publication, 1999.
12. Lanzet M. Comedogenic Effects of cosmetic raw materials. Cosmet Toiletr 1986; 101:63–72.
13. Van Reeth I, Marchioretto S, Dahman F, et al. Silicones: enhanced protection across personal care
applications. International Federation of Societies of Cosmetic Chemists (IFSCC) 20th. Cannes, France,
1998.
14. Van Reeth I, Blakely J. Use of current and new test methods to demonstrate the benefits of
alkylmethysiloxanes in sun care products, presented at the European UV Filter conference, Paris,
France 1999, Nov 3–4.
15. Abrutyn E, Marchioretto S. Translating silicone chemistry to color cosmetics. Cosmet News 1998; 21
(118):25–29.
16. Van Reeth I, Wilson A. Understanding factors which influence permeability of silicones and their
derivatives. Cosmet and Toiletr 1994; 109(7):87–92.
17. Van Reeth I, Dahman F, Hannington J. Alkymethylsiloxanes as SPF enhancers. Relationship between
effects and physico-chemical properties. International Federation of Societies of Cosmetic Chemists
(IFSCC) 19th Congress Poster. Sydney, Australia, 1996.
18. Van Reeth I, Postiaux S, Van Dort H. Silicones bring multifunctional performance to sun care. Cosmet
and Toiletr 2006; 121(10):41–54.
19. Vervier I, Courel B. Masking wrinkles and enhancing skin feel with silicone elastomer powder.
Cosmet and Toiletr 2006; 121(11):65–74.
20. Nichols K, Desai N, Lebwohl M. Effective sunscreen ingredients and cutaneous irritation in patients
with rosacea. Cutis 1998; 61:344–346.
21. Blakely J. The Benefits of Silicones in Facial and Body Cleansing Products. Brussels: Dow Corning
Publication, 1994.
22. Kowandy V, Van Reeth I, Krause A. A new silicone carrier expands formulating options, HAPPI
Magazine 2007; 102–106.
23. Disapio AJ, Fridd P. Dimethicone copolyols for cosmetic and toiletry applications. International
Federation of Societies of Cosmetic Chemists (IFSCC) 19th Congress Platform Presentation. London,
United Kingdom, 1988.
24. Van Reeth I, Marteaux L, Delvaux M. Silicone in body wash: a new perspective for formulators. In:
Cosmetic Conference. Du¨sseldorf, Germany, April 26, 2001.
25. Hickerson R, More M, Van Reeth I. New Options with Silicone Emulsifiers. Midland Michigan: Dow
Corning Publication, 2003. Form No. 27-1082-01.
26. Marchioretto S. Optimising the Use of Silicones in Haircare Products. Brussels: Dow Corning
Publication, 1998. Form No. 22-1720-01.
27. Marchioretto S, Blakely J. Substantiated synergy between silicone and quats for clear and mild
conditioning shampoos. SO¨ FW J October 2, 1997; 123(12):811–812, 814–816, 818.
28. Thomson B, Vincent J, Halloran D. Anhydrous hair conditioners: silicone-in-silicone delivery systems.
Soap, Cosmetics, Chemical Specialties 1992; 68:25–28.
29. Fridd P, Taylor R. Dow Corning; Hair dyeing with improved color depth and retention–by
pretreating the hair with polysiloxane with functional hydroxyl or nitrogen-containing groups. GB
Patents GB2186889.
Silicones
379

=== Page 397 ===
30. Fridd P, Taylor R. Dow Corning; Hair dyeing method in presence of hydroxy-polysiloxane – to
increase depth of color and/or prolong retention. GB Patents GB 2186890.
31. Reimer BM, Oldinski RL, Glover DA. An objective method for evaluating hair shine. SOAP, COSMET,
CHEM. SPEC. October, 1995. Form No. 25-795-95.
32. Brewster B. Color Lock in hair care, Bench & Beyond, Cosmet Toiletr 2006; 121(3):28–36.
33. Van Reeth I, Urrutia A. New Silicone-Based Solutions for Suncare. Bad Durkheim, Germany:
SEPAWA Congress conference proceedings, October 2003.
34. Johnson B, Quackenbush K, Swanton B. Silicones for hair strenghtening. Cosmet and Toiletr 2007;
122(3):59–66.
35. Abrutyn E, Bahr B, Fuson S. Overview of the antiperspirant market: technology and trends, Dow
Corning white paper, 1993. Literature no. 25-400-93.
36. Abrutyn ES, Bahr BC, Legrow GE, et al. Dow Corning; Underarm formulations providing modified
hardness, reduced whitening etc. – containing alkyl-methyl-siloxane compounds or aralkyl-methyl-
siloxane compounds. US 5, 225, 188.
37. Spitzer J. Dow Corning; Antiperspirant aerosol composition containing synthetic polymer gum–
enabling high astringent concentration and low spray production. US 4, 152, 416.
380
Van Reeth

=== Page 398 ===
36
Sensory Effects and Irritation:
A Strong Relationshipa
Miranda A. Farage
Feminine Clinical Sciences Innovation Center, The Procter & Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Most methods for testing the potential skin effects of consumer products rely on an objective
evaluation of how the product affects the appearance of the skin, i.e., erythema, as scored on a
predefined numerical scale. In contrast, the endpoints that consumers typically describe are
subjective in nature and are an evaluation of the sensations the product causes them to
experience, i.e., itchy, dry, rough, tight, etc. Even though these subjective sensory effects are
the endpoints reported by the consumer and, therefore, arguably the most important, few test
methods incorporate a means to leverage these endpoints.
Few reports attempt to either quantitate sensory effects or correlate sensory effects to the
degree of irritation. In studies on soap and detergent bars, Simion et al. determined that test
subjects differentiated between products on the basis of sensations they felt during
exaggerated arm-washing applications (1). In several test methods designed to simulate
normal use conditions for detergent and personal cleansing products, the perceptions of the
panelists are routinely recorded during the course of the study as an additional endpoint to
consider when evaluating the data (2,3). Sting tests have been used in evaluating some
cosmetics and leave-on preparations (4,5).
We recently developed the behind-the-knee (BTK) test method as a means for evaluating
the irritation potential of catamenial products (6–8). The BTK measures both chemical irritation
and the potential for mechanical irritation due to friction. In the course of this development
program, we collected subjective sensory data from our panelists in parallel with the outward
signs of irritation, i.e., erythema and dryness, to determine if there may be value in attempting
to quantitatively study sensory effects to learn more about the relationship between these
sensations and irritant effects. We evaluated the results against the fundamental question: are
differences in the irritation potential, as defined by objective scores of erythema, consistent
with differences in the reported sensory effects?
Subjective sensory data on certain test products tested in the BTK were compared to
several different objective endpoints: unaided visual scoring, enhanced visual scoring using
polarized light, and the descriptive analysis panel (DAP).
Unaided visual scoring of erythema has been used reliably for a number of years to
detect skin irritation in a wide variety of test protocols on a large number of body sites. It
requires no special equipment and is easily adaptable to large-scale testing, such as the type
that is required to provide safety assurance for consumer products. Trained skin graders can
accurately and reproducibly score test sites for erythema and dryness (9). Several authors have
demonstrated that trained graders can reliably detect evidence of irritation with equal or
higher degrees of sensitivity to that of instrumental measures (10–14).
Enhanced visual scoring using polarized light has been added to existing test protocols
recently in an attempt to increase the ability to differentiate between very similar products
without requiring other protocol modifications. When skin reactions are scored visually, the
grader is seeing a combination of endpoints: the surface changes, which provide information
about the shape and texture of the skin surface, and the subsurface changes, which provide
information about internal components such as erythema, pigmentation, and the vasculature
(15,16). Use of polarized light sources can enable the observer to selectively examine either the
surface or subsurface components. Authors have described the use of polarized light as an aid
aA portion of this review appeared in Farage MA, Santana V, Henley E. 2005. Correlating sensory effects with irritation. J of
Toxicol: Cutan Ocul Toxicol 2005; 24:45–52. With kind permission of Taylor and Francis Publishing Group.

=== Page 399 ===
in visualizing various skin conditions, including irritation, acne vulgaris, rosacea, photoaging,
lentigo simplex, and basal cell carcinoma (17–20).
The DAP is used in the development of feminine care products to evaluate the intensity
of six physical characteristics, including degree of plasticity, compression (loft), scratchiness,
glide, cottony feel, and flexibility. We compared the results of the DAP to the results of the
sensory effects analysis attempting to determine if certain physical characteristics of the
products correlated to adverse sensations experienced by the BTK panelists.
The test design and conduct of the BTK studies have been described in detail by Farage
et al. (6). Each study consisted of 9–22 healthy, adult volunteers (male and female) who had
signed an informed consent. For each study, the protocol was approved by the test facility’s
institutional review board. Subjects were excluded from participation for certain skin
abnormalities or health conditions that could adversely impact the test, as detailed in the
prior publication.
Test materials consisted of currently marketed products and products in development
for the marketplace. These included standard catamenial pads (products A, B, C, E, H, M, and
N), a pantiliner (product P), a lotioned pad (product NL), intralabial pads (product IL2 and
IL25), and tampons (products R and S). For application, a test material was placed horizontally
and held in place behind the knee by an elastic knee band (Ace1 knee bandage) of the
appropriate size and removed by the panelists 30 to 60 minutes before returning to the
laboratory for grading and/or reapplication of test materials. Exposures consisted of six hours
per day for five consecutive days.
Visual grading of the BTK test sites was conducted by an expert grader under a 100-watt
incandescent daylight blue bulb. Scoring was done using a scale of “0” to “4” previously
described by Farage et al. (6). In this scale, “0” indicates no apparent cutaneous involvement
and “4” is moderate to severe, spreading erythema and/or edema. The same grader was used
throughout an experiment, and the grader was not aware of the treatment assignments.
Enhanced visual grading using polarized light has been described in detail by Farage (21).
Grading was conducted using a polarized light visualization system (Syris v6001 Visualization
System, Syris Scientific, LLC, Gray, Maine, or syrisscientific.com), with separate scores recorded
for parallel-polarizing illumination (surface mode) followed by cross-polarizing illumination
(subsurface mode). On the basis of a communication with the manufacturer, the subsurface mode
allows visualization of the site at a depth of 1 mm beneath the surface.
The mean irritation scores (unaided and enhanced visual) were compared using analysis
of variance/analysis of co-variance (ANOVA/ANCOVA) or, where model assumptions failed,
CMH/stratified CMH (Cochran-Mentel-Haenszel) statistical comparison.
In the BTK, panelists were asked to keep a daily diary of skin problems experienced at
the test sites, as previously described (22,23). Panelists were asked if they experienced one or
more of eight specific sensations, including the sample rubbing against the skin, the sample
sticking to the skin, chafing, burning, itching, pain, edema, or any other discomfort. Results
were evaluated for a higher occurrence of each individual skin problem with one treatment
versus another using McNemar’s test.
For Table 1, mean irritation scores were evaluated versus reported sensory effects using
logistic regression, i.e., the presence/absence of a particular skin complaint was regressed
against the specific irritation scores.
The DAP uses 15 individuals trained to evaluate six different physical characteristics of
the products: degree of plasticity, scratchiness, glide and cottony feel of the top sheet, and
compression and flexibility of the pad. These individuals evaluate products using their
fingertips and assess the intensity of the various product characteristics on the basis of an
8-point scale, with 0 ¼ not at all, 4 ¼ moderate, and 8 ¼ extreme. Results were analyzed by
ANOVA, and mean differences were tested for statistical significance using Duncan multiple
comparison at the 90% confidence level.
SENSORY EFFECTS AND UNAIDED VISUAL SCORES
Sensory effects have been collected and analyzed statistically in nine BTK studies containing
16 comparisons between two products or sets of test conditions. In each experiment, the
reported sensory effects for the test samples were compared to determine if the results were
382
Farage

=== Page 400 ===
similar to those obtained when the mean irritation scores were compared. Results are
summarized in Table 2. In 8 of the 16 individual product comparisons, the results are
consistent (shown at the top of the Table 2). In seven of these cases, there were no differences in
either the mean irritation scores or in the percentage of subjects reporting various sensory
effects. In the remaining case, significant differences in the mean irritation scores appeared for
at least one scoring time point, and the sample giving the higher mean score (product A)
produced significantly more reports of sensory effects. In 5 of the 16 comparisons, significant
differences in the mean irritation scores appeared for at least one scoring time point, and no
differences appeared for the reported sensory effects. In 2 of the 16 comparisons, differences
appeared in the reports of sensory effects that were not evident in the mean irritation scores. In
one case, the reported sensory effects were in conflict with the mean irritation results (Table 2,
study #02008, product P vs. product IL2).
Products A and B have been compared seven times in the BTK test in addition to the
three comparisons shown in Table 2. In 8 of the 10 total tests (including study #03005-T9 shown
in Table 2), product A was significantly more irritating than product B, on the basis of mean
irritation scores with visual grading. In two comparisons (study #03005, shown in Table 2, and
one other study not shown), the differences did not achieve significance.
Another analysis was conducted to determine if reports of adverse sensory effects were
likely to increase as the objective score for irritation increased. In other words, if a test site is
scored as a “2.0” for erythema, is it more likely that that panelist will report a sensory effect than
if the site were scored as a “1.0”? Table 1 shows the results of regression analyses conducted to
determine if an increase in reported sensory effects correlated to an increase in the irritation
scores recorded for the eight experiments (16 comparisons) shown in Table 2. In eight
experiments, reports of one or more sensory effects were correlated to the degree of irritation. In
one experiment (03005-3), there was a correlation between the panelists tested under one set of
experimental conditions (wet samples on compromised skin), but not under the other set of
conditions (dry samples on intact skin). Burning was the effect that was most commonly
correlated to higher irritation scores (in seven cases), followed by pain (in five cases).
SENSORY EFFECTS AND POLARIZED LIGHT-ENHANCED VISUAL SCORES
Two feminine protection products were evaluated in the BTK using unaided and enhanced
visual grading. Scores were recorded after each product application (6-hour application
Table 1
Correlation of Sensory Effects with Visual Irritation Scores in Behind-the-Knee Studies
Study number Products tested
Correlation of sensory effects with irritation scores
02017
Products N and L
Reports of burning, pain, itching, and rubbing correlate to irritation
score.
03005
Products A and B under
4 different test conditions
Reports of burning, pain, sticking, and “other” correlate to irritation
score.
03005-3
Products S and R under
4 different test conditions
Reports of burning, sticking, and chafing correlate to irritation
scores for the w/c a test sites only. No correlation for d/i b test
sites.
03005-4a
Products GT and M
Reports of burning correlate to irritation score.
03005-4b
Products GT and E
Reports of burning, pain, and sticking correlate to irritation score.
03005-4c
Products GT and H
Reports of pain, itching, rubbing, and “other” correlate to irritation
score.
03005-9
Products A and B
Reports of burning, edema, and itching correlate to irritation
score.
02008
Products P and IL25
Reports of burning, pain, and chafing correlate to irritation score.
02036
Product C under 2 different
test conditions
Reports of burning and sticking correlate to irritation score.
02008
Products P and IL2
Reports of burning, pain, and chafing correlate to irritation score.
a(w/i) ¼ wet sample on intact skin.
b(w/c) ¼ wet sample on skin compromised by tape stripping. Studies were conducted as described in the legend
for Table 2. For each study, the irritation scores and reported sensory effects were considered for all test sites,
regardless of the products or treatments being tested. Numerical irritation scores were then evaluated versus
reported sensory effects using logistic regression.
Sensory Effects and Irritation
383

=== Page 401 ===
Table 2
Behind-the-Knee Studies with Comparison of Visual Mean Irritation Scores and Sensory Effects
Results
Study
number
Samples compared
Comparison of mean
irritation scores
Comparison of adverse
sensory effects
Consistent results from nonaided visual scoring and sensory effects
02017
Product N
Product NL
Not significantly different
Not significantly different
03005
Product A (d/i)
Product A (w/c)
Not significantly different
Not significantly different
03005-3
Product S (w/c)
Product R (w/c)
Not significantly different
Not significantly different
03005-3
Product S (d/i)
Product R (d/i)
Not significantly different
Not significantly different
03005-4a
Product GT
Product M
Not significantly different
Not significantly different
03005-4b
Product GT
Product E
Not significantly different
Not significantly different
03005-4c
Product GT
Product H
Not significantly different
Not significantly different
03005-9
Product A
Product B
Significantly different on
days 3 and 4.
Percentage of subjects
experiencing burning is
different on all days (1–4).
Product A > product B
Product A > product B
Inconsistent results from nonaided visual scoring and sensory effects
02008
Product P
Product IL25
Significantly different only
on day 5.
Product P > product IL25
Not significantly different
02036
Product C (w/i)a
Product C (w/c)b
Significantly different only
on day 1.
Product C (w/c) > product
C (w/i)
Not significantly different
03005
Product B (d/i)c
Product B (w/c)
Significantly different on
days 1, 3, and 5.
Product B (w/c) > product
B (d/i)
Not significantly different
03005-3
Product S (w/c)
Product S (d/i)
Significantly different on
days 2, 3, and 5.
Product S (w/c) > product
S (d/i)
Not significantly different
03005-3
Product R (w/c)
Product R (d/i)
Significantly different on
days 2, 3, and 5.
Product R (w/c) > product
R (d/i)
Not significantly different
03005
Product A (d/i)
Product B (d/i)
Not significantly different
Percentage of subjects
experiencing burning is
different on day 1.
Product A (d/i) > product
B (d/i)
03005
Product A (w/c)
Product B (w/c)
Not significantly different
Percentage of subjects
experiencing pain and
sticking is different on days
2 and 3, respectively.
Product A (w/c) > product
B (w/c)
02008
Product P
Product IL2
Significantly different only
on day 1.
Product IL2 > product P
Percentage of subjects
experiencing itching is
different on day 3.
Product P > product IL2
a(w/i), wet sample on intact skin.
b(w/c), wet sample on skin compromised by tape stripping.
c(d/i), dry sample on intact skin (standard protocol).
In each study, panelists wore the test substances for 6-hr daily for 4 days in close contact with the skin behind the
knee. The two test areas (left knee and right knee) were randomly assigned 1 of the 2 test materials or conditions
being compared in that particular study. Test sites were scored 30–60 min after removal of each product
application. The mean irritation score for each treatment at each afternoon scoring was determined. There were
compared using ANOVA/ANCOVA or, where model assumptions failed, CMH/stratified CMH tests. In addition,
subjects kept daily diaries of sensations associated with each test site throughout the course of treatment.
Panelists were specifically asked about the sample and knee brace rubbing against the skin or sticking to the skin
and about chafing, burning, itching, pain, or any other discomfort. Each individual complaint was tabulated, and the
percentage of subjects who experienced that compliant was determined. The data were evaluated using
McNemar’s test.
384
Farage

=== Page 402 ===
followed by 18-hour recovery period). As shown in Figure 1A, significant differences between
the two products were apparent on day 3 (after three applications) using unaided visual
scoring. Using polarized light-enhanced scoring, significant differences were observed after
Figure
1
Standard
visual
and
enhanced visual grading using two
similar products in the BTK. Two fem-
inine protection products (pad A and
pad B) were evaluated in the BTK.
Samples were applied for six hours per
day for four consecutive days (14–16
panelists per group). Scoring was con-
ducted at baseline and the morning
following each patch removal (day 1–4).
The graph plots mean erythema
(S.E.) at each scoring time point.
Figure 1(A) shows visual scores; 1(B),
subsurface scores; and 1(C), surface
scores. Treatment comparisons were
evaluated using the stratified CMH test.
(*Significant difference between pad A
and pad B, p < 0.05). Pad A ¼ open
symbols. Pad B ¼ closed symbols.
Abbreviation: BTK, behind the knee.
Sensory Effects and Irritation
385

=== Page 403 ===
the first and second application (for subsurface and surface scoring, Fig. 1B and 1C,
respectively).
The number of panelists who experienced burning sensations at the test sites is shown in
Figure 2. With every sample application, there was a significantly higher number of
individuals reporting burning sensations with pad A compared with pad B. In addition, a
significantly higher number of individuals reported pain with pad A during the third sample
application and sensation of the sample sticking to the skin during the second and third
application (data not shown).
SENSORY EFFECTS AND DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS PANELS
DAPs, conducted in the course of normal product development activities, evaluate certain
physical characteristics of the products. Results from DAPs on products that have also been
tested in the BTK are shown in Table 3. In the comparison of products A and B, product B
scored lower in the negative attributes and higher in the positive attributes. Results on the
comparison of products G and E were mixed, with product G scoring higher on the negative
attribute of plastic feel, while product E scored higher on the negative attribute of scratchiness.
Likewise, product E scored higher on the positive attribute of glide but lower on the positive
attribute of cottony feel.
DISCUSSION
This study examined data collected in the course of the development and conduct of the BTK
test for correlations between the objective scores of erythema and the sensory effects reported
by the panelists. As shown in Table 2, in about half of the comparisons (7 of 16), the samples
were not significantly different on the basis of either a difference in unaided visual scores for
Figure 2
Reports of burning sensations in the BTK. In the BTK, each of the 30 panelists was asked to keep a
daily diary of skin problems experienced at the test sites. Results were evaluated for a higher occurrence of each
individual skin problem with one treatment versus another. The graph plots mean erythema (S.E.) at each
scoring time point (as shown in Fig. 1), and the portion of the subject population reporting sensations of burning at
the test sites during each patch application. Treatment comparisons for the sensory effect was evaluated using
McNemar’s test. (**Significant difference between pad A and pad B, p < 0.001). (*Significant difference between
pad A and pad B, p < 0.05). Pad A ¼ open symbols. Pad B ¼ closed symbols. Abbreviation: BTK, behind the knee.
386
Farage

=== Page 404 ===
irritation or reported adverse sensory effects. For one sample, both the irritation scores and the
sensory effects were significantly different. In 5 of the 16 comparisons, sample differences were
detected in the objective scores that were not apparent in the reported sensory effects. In the
remaining three sample comparisons, the reported sensory effects indicated sample differences
that were either not detected in the objective scores, or in one case, were contrary to the
objective scores.
In most of the studies in which sensory data were collected, the differences in mean
irritation caused by the test samples were generally small, with either no significant differences
or differences only at isolated time points. In the early development of the BTK, those control
samples were tested that produced more pronounced differences in mean irritation, which
persisted throughout the experiment. Unfortunately, sensory data were not collected at this
early stage of the development of the test model. Tests on products that produce a more
pronounced difference in mean irritation may improve the ability to detect product differences
solely on the basis of the sensory effects and may enable more definitive conclusions about the
correlation between observable irritation, as determined by objective scoring of erythema, and
what the panelists feel. A logical next step is to collect and analyze sensory effects in studies
where the test samples and/or test conditions would be expected to produce greater
differences in the mean irritation.
Although we were not always able to reliably differentiate between the samples using
solely sensory effects in these particular studies, we did observe that an increase in the
irritation score is correlated with a higher percentage of panelists reporting adverse sensory
effects, as shown in Table 1. This indicates that even among volunteer panelists who are not
specifically trained in observing and reporting sensory effects, the increased reports of sensory
effects reliably reflects an increase in irritation, as measured by objective observation. This
correlation may be improved by modifying the manner in which data on sensory effects are
collected. Currently, panelists are given eight different terms to describe an unpleasant
sensation, including rubbing, sticking, chafing, burning, itching, pain, or “other”. By providing
eight different choices, and treating these as separate endpoints, we may have inadvertently
designed the experiments in a way that undermines our ability to detect trends. Statistical
differences for any one of the eight choices may be extremely difficult to achieve with a panel
of only 15 to 18 individuals. Modifying the sensory diaries to reduce the number of choices that
panelists can choose to describe any unpleasant sensation may improve our abilities to
discriminate based on sensory effects.
Enhanced visual scoring enables detection of physiological changes that are not apparent
using standard visual scoring, i.e., subclinical changes. Previously, we have reported that
subjective consumer comments indicate that consumers can detect differences in skin effects
caused by the use of two similar products. For example, consumers have consistently indicated
that pad B is seen as less irritating than pad A in “real use” situations; however, most test
protocols repeatedly fail to differentiate between these two products (7). Sensory effects in the
BTK have been shown to be consistent with consumer comments and reliably differentiate
between pad A and pad B (23). This current investigation confirms that sensory effects
Table 3
Descriptive Analysis Panel (DAP) Results for Products Tested in the BTK Test
Mean scores
Product A
Product B
Product Ga
Product E
Negative attributes:
Plastic feel
6.8b
0.0
3.9b
0.3
Scratchiness
5.4b
1.5
3.5
5.6b
Positive attributes:
Glide
4.8
6.7b
2.6
5.5b
Cottony feel
0.0
6.3b
4.2b
3.4
aTop sheet tested.
bHigher at the 90% confidence level.
In the DAP, individuals specifically trained to evaluate the positive and negative physical
characteristics of products graded these attributes on an 8-point scale, with 0 ¼ not at all,
4 ¼ moderate, and 8 ¼ extreme. Mean differences were tested for statistical significance using
Duncan multiple comparison.
Sensory Effects and Irritation
387

=== Page 405 ===
correlate with visual scoring in the BTK and confirms that sensory effects enable the
differentiation between two very similar products (Figs. 1 and 2).
Unlike the BTK test, which uses healthy volunteers as panelists, the DAP is conducted
using individuals who are specifically trained in detecting and grading physical attributes of
products. As shown in Table 3, this trained panel was able to clearly differentiate between
products A and B for four key product attributes (two positive and two negative). In contrast,
products G and E produced mixed results, resulting in no clear conclusion on which product
would be superior, overall.
While the endpoints in the DAP are completely different from the sensory effects
reported by panelists in the BTK, the product attributes graded in the DAP are likely
responsible for the adverse sensory effects the panelists reported in the BTK. This is illustrated
in Table 4. This table provides a qualitative summary comparing the results on products or top
sheets tested in the BTK and in the DAP. As mentioned above, in most BTK tests (8 of 10
studies), product A produced significantly higher mean irritation scores than product B. In the
one BTK study where sensory effects were collected, adverse sensations were reported
significantly more often with product A than product B. This is consistent with the positive
and negative product attributes identified in the DAP where product A had significantly
higher scores for the negative attributes and significantly lower scores for the positive
attributes. When products G and E are compared in the BTK, they are similar with regard to
both mean irritation scores and adverse sensory effects. Likewise, these products could not be
clearly differentiated in the DAP, where each product scored higher in one of two positive
attributes and in one of two negative attributes.
In future BTK studies, we plan to incorporate terms in the BTK test that are comparable
to those used in the DAP. Currently, the descriptive terms are completely different for the two
test methods, making it difficult to relate the results. To some degree, this is unavoidable, since
the two tests are designed to measure different endpoints. However, some of the descriptors in
the DAP may be meaningful for use in the BTK test. For example, a material described in the
DAP as having a “plastic feel” may cause the sensation of “stickiness” or “chafing” in some
individuals in the BTK. Therefore, a logical next step is to conduct a BTK test using volunteers
trained for the DAP testing to determine how these individuals describe the sensations
experienced in the BTK.
REFERENCES
1. Simion FA, Rhein LD, Morrison BM, et al. Self-perceived sensory responses to soap and synthetic
detergent bars correlate with clinical signs of irritation. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 32:205–211.
2. Bannan EA, Griffith JF, Nusair TL, et al. Skin testing of laundered fabrics in the dermal safety
assessment of enzyme-containing detergents. J Toxicol Cutan Ocular Toxicol 1992; 11:327–339.
Table 4
Qualitative Summary Comparison of Objective and Subjective Endpoints
Adverse
Topsheet attributes in DAP
Product
Comparison of mean
sensory
Negative attributes
Positive attributes
comparisons
irritation scores
effects
Plastic feel
Scratchy
Glide
Cottony feel
Product A vs.
product B
Product A > product B
in 8 of 10 studies a
A > B b
A > B
A > B
B > A
B > A
Product G vs.
product E c
Product G ¼ product E
in 1 study
G ¼ E
G > E
E > G
E > G
G > E
aSeven studies were conducted on complete products A and B, and 3 studies were conducted on the product top
sheets.
bSensory effects collected in one study on complete products.
cTop sheet for product G tested in DAP.
Mean irritation scores and adverse sensory effects data were taken from Table 2. In addition, several other studies
were included in which products A and B were compared (data not shown). DAP results were taken from Table 3.
388
Farage

=== Page 406 ===
3. Barel AO, Lambrecht R, Clarys P, et al. A comparative study of the effects on the skin of a classical bar
soap and a syndet cleansing bar in normal use conditions and in the soap chamber test. Skin Res
Technol 2001; 7:98–104.
4. Christensen M, Kligman AM. An improved procedure for conducting lactic acid stinging tests on
facial skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1996; 4:1–11.
5. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. A method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied
substances. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:197–209.
6. Farage MA, Gilpin DA, Enane NA, et al. Development of a new test for mechanical irritation: behind
the knee as a test site. Skin Res Technol 2001; 7:193–203.
7. Farage MA, Meyer S, Walter D. Development of a sensitive test method to evaluate mechanical
irritation potential on mucosal skin. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:85–95.
8. Farage MA. The Behind-the-Knee test: an efficient model for evaluating mechanical and chemical
irritation. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12:73–82.
9. Griffiths HA, Wilhelm KP, Robinson MK, et al. Interlaboratory evaluation of a human patch test for
the identification of skin irritation potential/hazard. Food Chem Toxicol 1997; 35:255–260.
10. Magnusson BM, Koskinen LD. Effects of topical application of capsaicin to human skin: a comparison
of effects evaluated by visual assessment, sensation registration, skin blood flow and cutaneous
impedance measurements. Acta Derm Venereol 1996; 76:129–132.
11. Ollmar S, Nyre´n M, Nicander I, et al. Electrical impedance compared with other non-invasive
bioengineering techniques and visual scoring for detection of irritation in human skin. Brit J Dermatol
1994; 130:29–36.
12. Fullerton A, Rode B, Serup J. Skin irritation typing and grading based on laser Doppler perfusion
imaging. Skin Res Technol 2002; 8:23–31.
13. Spoo J, Wigger-Alberti W, Berndt U, et al. Skin cleansers: three test protocols for the assessment of
irritancy ranking. Acta Derm Venereol 2002; 82:13–17.
14. Wigger-Alberti W, Hinnen U, Elsner P. Predictive testing of metalworking fluids: a comparison of 2
cumulative human irritation models and correlation with epidemiological data. Con Derm 1997;
36:14–20.
15. Anderson RR. Polarized light examination and photography of the skin. Arch Dermatol 1991;
127:1000–1005.
16. Kollias N. Polarized light photography of human skin. In: Wilhelm KP, Elsner P, Berardesca E,
Maibach HI, eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Skin Surface Imaging and Analysis. Boca Raton, Florida:
CRC Press, 1997:95–104.
17. Kollias N, Gillies R, Muccini JA, et al. A single parameter, oxygenated hemoglobin, can be used to
quantify experimental irritant-induced inflammation. J Invest Dermatol 1995; 104:421–424.
18. Muccini JA, Kollias N, Phillips SB, et al. Polarized light photography in the evaluation of photoaging.
J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 33:765–769.
19. McFall K. Photography of dermatological conditions using polarized light. J Audiov Media Med 1996;
19:5–9.
20. Phillips SB, Kollias N, Gillies R, et al. Polarized light photography enhances visualization of
inflammatory lesions of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol 1997; 37:948–952.
21. Farage MA. Enhancement of visual scoring of skin irritant reactions using cross-polarized and
parallel-polarized light. 2007 Contact Dermatitis; 57:1–9.
22. Farage MA, Meyer SJ, Walter D. Evaluation of modifications of the traditional patch test in assessing
the chemical irritation potential of feminine hygiene products. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:73–84.
23. Farage MA, Santana MV, Henley E. Correlating sensory effects with irritation. Cutan Ocul Toxicol
2005; 24:45–52.
Sensory Effects and Irritation
389

=== Page 408 ===
37
Decorative Products
Rodolphe Korichi
Cutaneous Biology and Objectivation Department, LVMH Recherche, Perfumes & Cosmetics, Saint Jean de
Braye, France
Jean-Franc¸ois Tranchant
Innovative Materials and Technology Department, LVMH Recherche, Perfumes & Cosmetics, Saint Jean de
Braye, France
INTRODUCTION
Makeup was created in the Middle East 5000 years ago. It was to give themselves a more attractive
image, to protect their bodies from a dry and very sunny climate, and also as medical care that all
the Egyptians of the Antiquity used makeup. For a long time being considered as an art, the makeup
entered, with the development of the cinema and the television, in a phase or science and technique
to help the esthetic preoccupations of the women. Over this century, the role of the makeup changes
with the changing culture of the society. However, central themes are easily recognizable through
each decade. The natural look of perfection continues in the year of today, as with the goal of
restoring youth and looking younger. The cosmetics’ industry has experienced some significant
changes in the past five years. Marketing has evolved, the consumer has become more
knowledgeable and demanding, and cosmetics themselves have become more sophisticated and
innovative. Technological advances have allowed for the creation of multifunctional products that
perform more than their basic role. For example, foundations with high sun protection factor (SPF)
protect from ultraviolet (UV) rays, lipsticks moisturize, and mascaras lengthen, curve, and thicken.
The biggest performance development in color cosmetics has been the creation of “stay-on”
products, which are long lasting. These products first appeared in the foundations category, then
transferred across product categories to include lipsticks, eye shadows, mascaras, and nail enamel.
The concept has been extended with stay-on lipliners in addition to transfer-resistant lipsticks. All
these evolutions could not have appeared without the progress of chemistry, which made pigments
easier to formulate and brought polymers, which improves the sensory and physicochemical
properties of makeup products. An improved incorporation of specific raw materials used in skin
care products and pigments with visual effects allowed the creation of some specular effects.
Makeup products contribute also in a significant way to the general health and well-being of
women. They have a major role, which is to provide psychological stimulation to satisfy personal
desires for self-improvement, self adornment, and good grooming for one’s own sense of well-being
and for the general attention or attraction of others. The “psychology of cosmetics” appears therefore
as a new field concerning the characterization of the beneficial effects of cosmetic practices (1). This
heightened technology of makeup products, the sensory interactions based on the skin-brain
connection, and ever more stronger claims are today accompanied by the development of specific
evaluation methods used to quantify these improvements and to prove the claimed efficacy.
MAKEUP FORMULATIONS
In makeup products, pigments play an essential role because they provide the chromatic
modifications necessary for these qualities. Pigments used in current makeup applications can
be classified as organic pigments, mineral pigments, and nacrous pigments (Table 1). Twenty
years ago, the cosmetic industry introduced the treated pigments. The surface properties of
pigments differ with the size and the shape of the pigment particles as produced by the various
manufacturing methods. It is know that the behavior of pigments is closely related to surface
properties, and can be classified into hydrophilic and lipophilic. It is very important to know
these properties of powders when makeup products are formulated. Generally, pigments and
substrates used (mica, talc, sericite, borum nitride, etc.) for makeup cosmetics are hydrophilic.
The surface properties of these powders can be changed from hydrophilic to hydrophobic with

=== Page 409 ===
several of the aforementioned coatings depending upon the final products’ function. There are
many processes by which pigments may be surface treated. The most common methods used
today are through chemical interactions, electron-charge reactions, mechanochemical pro-
cesses, and mechanical processes. Other processes are essentially variants of these four basic
methods, as witnessed by an introduction in surface treatment manufacturing called
ultramicronization. Surface treatments impart easier dispersibility, better stability, and
flocculation resistance to pigments. The second basic important advantage for the cosmetic
chemist in using treated pigments is in development of hydrophobic systems (e.g., silicon
media). Hydrophobic pigments of both types are available, including treated inorganic colors,
DC colors, nylon, titanium dioxide, talc, kaolin, mica, and other minerals. These pigments, and
the products made with them, show water-resistant properties, improved skin adhesion,
improved color consistency, and better smooth skin feel than when uncoated materials were
used in the same formulations.
Lisptick (2)
Lipsticks are mixtures of waxes, oils, and pigments in varying concentrations to yield the
characteristics of the final product. Waxes will give rigidity and solidity to the stick. They can
be of vegetable origin like candellila wax, which brings brightness or carnauba wax that gives
hardness. They can also be of mineral origin like ozokerite wax for adhesion or of synthetic
origin like polyethylene, which is compatible with silicones and avoids the exudation of oils.
Usually, lipsticks contain a combination of these waxes (~20%) that are selected and blended
carefully to achieve the desired melting point. Oils (40–50%) are used to give the lipstick its
slippery and soft aspect when applied; for example, castor oil is used to disperse pigments and
white mineral oil or oleyl alcohol is used to form a film suitable for application to the lips.
Colouring agents are present between 2% and 10% and can be of several types. One mainly
finds synthetic pigments, but minerals like iron oxides (red, yellow, or black) are also used to
give the color and titanium dioxides bring coverage, opacity, and intensity. Pearl pigments can
also be used to give color highlights. It should be noted that pigments of vegetable origin are
rarely used in cosmetics because most of them are unstable to heat or light. Those of mineral
origin also create a problem because they contain too many heavy metals according to the
cosmetic legislation. In relation to the claims, additives can be added such as sun filters, which
protect the formula or bring a sun protection index, antioxidizers, vitamins (E, C, and B5),
moisturizing agents, or ceramides. A light fragrance (<1%) will be added to give the lipstick a
pleasant taste on lips and mask possible smells of raw materials. Overall, a standard lipstick
manufacture can be simplified in four stages: mixing waxes, oils and extenders at high temperature;
producting a concentrated dispersion of pigment (generally the pigments are grounded in an oily base
Table 1
Pigments Used in Current Makeup
Pigments
Description
Organic pigments
Selection of pigments for use in makeup is limited to those allowed by regulations of the
Food and Drug Administration in the United States. The pigments are formed by
precipitating the colorant onto a substrate, often aluminum or calcium hydroxide and thus
forming an insoluble salt.
Mineral pigments
Titanium dioxide and iron oxides are the most commonly used materials
Nacrous pigments
Nacrous or pearlescent pigments are used to create frosted appearance, often with other
special effects.
There are 3 classes of nacrous pigments used in makeup:
Natural pearl essence (for nail enamel), known as guanine (2 amino-6-hydroxy-purine), is
derived from the scales of atlantic herring. It provides a soft luster. The pigment’s density
is lowest of the 3 types noted above, and it is therefore the easiest to suspend. Natural
pearl essence exists in the form of platelets or needles.
Bismuth oxychloride
A commonly used synthetic nacrous pigment is bismuth oxychloride. This material’s luster
is more metallic than that of the other two types. The particles also have a higher density
(7.7), making then much more difficult to suspend.
Titanium dioxide—mica or mica coated by several different layers (silica, iron oxide, etc.).
Another type of pearlescent material is mica coated with a thin layer of titanium dioxide. The
interference effects change according to the thickness of the layer of titanium dioxide.
392
Korichi and Tranchant

=== Page 410 ===
such as castor oil); adding the colored paste at high temperature with the rest of the formula of the first
stage; molding the colored paste. The lipstick chemist must develop a formula, which has a good
cosmetic feel for the range of formulated shades. Therefore, the interest for him is to estimate
the influence of the pigments on the texture of the stick. From rheological studies, Tranchant
and Poulin (3) showed that one can monitor the manufacturing stages. Knowing the
physicochemical properties of pigments and their rheological behaviors after grinding, they
demonstrated and explained the influences on the texture and the mechanical properties of the
stick. One of the disadvantages of conventional lipsticks, which almost all consumers point
out, is the deterioration of its fresh appearance in a short period of time. To solve this problem
and improve the long-lasting properties, one of the most efficient techniques has been the use
of a film-forming polymer in combination with volatile oils (cyclomethicone) (4), which are
evaporated on contact with lips (no transfer effect). However, incorporation of the volatile oil
into the lipstick’s composition is accompanied by a loss in the application gloss over time and
comfort on lips. For a very glossy lipstick, the formulation is different from that of classical and
no transfer lipsticks because the level of the waxy phase goes up to about 80%. The ratio of oil
to wax is higher, whereas the rate of pigments is weaker (0–5%). For matte lipsticks, we use
talcs, some nylon powder, silica or polymethylmethacrylate, which give a powdered, slippery,
and very soft touch.
Nail Enamel
Nail enamel constituents can be grouped in six families. Lacquer, agent for adhesion and gloss,
solvents, plasticizers, pigments, and thixotropic agents, which, of course, must be compatible.
The heart of the nail enamel formula is the lacquer, which may be defined as a coating that
hardens and dries by evaporation of the solvent. The lacquers determine application
properties, gloss, wear properties such as adhesion, flexibility and abrasion resistance, water
resistance, viscosity, and suspension ability. The polymers selected must be soluble in
cosmetics solvents that dry rapidly, leaving a smooth, glossy film with excellent adhesion
properties and have a good pigment-wetting ability. Nitrocellulose (10–20%), a polymer
obtained by nitration (12% nitrogen) of the cellulose, is the filmogenic agent currently used in
nail enamel. However, used alone, it produces films, which tend to shrink and become brittle,
with only moderately good adhesion to nail surface. Different modifying resins (5–10%), such
as toluene sulfonamide resins, are added to improve the properties of the lacquers such as to
increase wear resistance and gloss. These effects are usually adjustable by selection of an
appropriate plasticizer (5–10%), a film-forming agent, which acts on the hardness of the film
giving it flexibility. Indeed, nail is deformable and elastic. A film adhering to the nail surface
must therefore be able to withstand any motions. Typical plasticizers used include phtalates,
citrates, camphor, etc. These polymers, resins, plasticizers, and pigments are mainly dispersed
in organic acetates and aromatics solvents with amount of solvents in nail enamel roughly of
70%. For formulation reasons, the ratios of solvents can be modified because the choice of
solvent can affect the drying time, flow characteristics of the film, and the flexibility of the film.
Note that regulations such as the “Proposition 65, California’s, Safe Drinking Water and Toxic
Enforcement Standard” limits use of certain solvents, such as toluene, which is considered as a
reproductive toxin. Hence, most of the new formulations are without aromatic solvents. The
physicochemical factors that determine the suspension stability of nail enamel are complex,
such as the particle size and distribution, density differences between particles and the
continuous medium, viscosity of the continuous medium, particle concentration, and particle-
particle interactions. However, several authors (5–7) showed that one can predict a dispersion
stability through dynamic studies of rheology, by relating directly the visco-elastic parameters
(viscosity, elastic modulus, and viscous modulus) to the dispersed system structure. Thus,
different formulation systems need different viscosity profiles to achieve equivalent esthetic
results. Indeed, the viscosity of nail enamel has to be sufficiently high to avoid the
sedimentation phenomena of pigments in the bottle, remain on the brush before the
application, and facilitate precise application, but the viscosity has to be low enough for
the nail enamel to be taken out of the bottle. This can be done if the viscosity is not linear. This
nonlinearity is obtained by using modified clays (thixotropic agents). To prevent settling,
pigments and pearlescent pigments are suspended by a rheological agent, and the organic
clays are the most commomly used material. Note that smectites are the mineral group of the
clays, which swell and have high cation exchange properties and can be observed as thin
Decorative Products
393

=== Page 411 ===
plates. The organic treatment of these clays consists of replacing the cations that are in the
natural product (Na, Ca) by some quaternary ammonium salts. The rheological properties of
the medium originate from the hydrogen bridges between the hydroxyl groups of the
dispersed plates and can be summarized as undisturbed nail enamel [the plates of clay are
packed and linked together by hydrogen bonds (high viscosity), when shearing, all these
bonds are broken, plates are all oriented in the same direction (low viscosity), and after
application, there are associations between the plates, and after application, there are
associations between the plates, and thus the viscosity increases. In the early 1990s,
environmental laws and regulations as well as the green movement in Europe were giving
rise to new formulation and an interest in a water vehicle, because it is known that organic
solvents can damage nails (e.g., moisturization and lipids].
Face Makeup
These products are used to make the skin look natural and beautiful for as long as possible; to
achieve this purpose, they unify the color of the skin, improve a dull and tired complexion,
give a matte finish, and mask possible imperfections like dark spots, small wrinkles, dark rings
under the eyes, and the pores of the skin surface. Their application must be easy and give
coverage for a natural complexion. They must have a pleasant texture, a good adhesive
property, be comfortable, and have a consistent color and smooth finish. There are more and
more no transfer and oil-free products. New pigments, such as pigments with an action on the
light such as soft focus, photochromic (8) or auto-adaptive effects, and pigments coated with
silicone or with fluoride oil giving a very specific sensory touch are also used. Foundations can
contain ceramides, used to strengthen the skin barrier, moisturizing agents like glycerin and
hyaluronic acid, vegetable oils, which improve the hydration and flexibility of the skin, and
free radical scavengers (vitamin E) as well as UV filters (UVA-UVB) giving makeup products a
sun protection index (SPF 5–30). Firming complexes to tone up and restructure the skin and
seboregulating can also be added.
Face Foundations
The formulations vary according to the qualities required for the product. Foundations are
available in various forms: liquids, gels, creams, solid creams, cakes (pancakes), mousse, or in
sticks (pen stick). There are four basic facial foundation formulations, which are the most
popular products for complexion: oil-in-water, water-in-oil, oil-free, and water-free or
anhydrous forms. Oil (silicone)-in-water emulsions are better for normal- and oily-skin
types, whereas water-in-oil (silicone) emulsions are better for normal- and dry-skin types. Oil-
free formulations are used for women with oily complexions, and anhydrous forms are used
by women with facial scarring who require camouflaging. Oil-based foundations are water-in-
oil emulsions containing pigments suspended in oil, such as mineral oil. Vegetable oils (e.g.,
coconut and sesame) and synthetic esters (octyl palmitate and isopropyl myristate) may also be
incorporated. Oil-based formulations also contain water (30–45%), siliconed tensio-actives
(5%), and some specific actives (vitamins, UV filters, moisturizing agents, etc.). The water
evaporation from the foundation just after application leaves the pigment in oil on the face.
Water-based foundations are oil-in-water emulsions containing a small amount of oil in which
pigments (10–15%) are emulsified with a relatively large quantity of water, which is the
dominant substance (50–60%). Oil-free foundations contain vegetable or mineral oils, but also
other oily substances, such as the silicones dimethicone or cyclomethicone, which leave the
skin with a dry feeling. They come in three forms: alchohol based, glycerin based, and creams
or lotions (ideal for oily or acne-prone skin). These foundations go on smoothly but dry fast, so
they must be blended quickly for even coverage. Water-free or anhydrous foundations are
waterproof, and high concentration of pigments can be incorporated. These several
formulations and the effects of pigments can control the darkening phenomenon done from
the sebum, hide the wrinkles, protect from the UV through the diffused reflection, give a
smooth finish, and do a long-lasting and no transfer effect of makeup. No transfer formulations
are an ingenious combination of volatile oils, which fix the pigments on the skin after
evaporation giving permanent effects. The most-used ingredients in the face makeup were
mica mat and micro titanium dioxide and silicon dioxide. Mica is transparent and easy to use;
the titanium dioxide has good covering effects, and it is very efficient against the UV, but its
394
Korichi and Tranchant

=== Page 412 ===
touch is hard; and the silica is a multi-porous ingredient, which absorbs the oil and sebum.
Nowadays, the surface treatments are wonderful techniques to give some special
functionalities to the raw material pigments and sensory properties (9). The smooth feeling
of a foundation mainly depends on the physical properties of the raw material pigments, such
as particle size, shape, and so on. Furthermore, by adding the moisturizing and water-
absorpting effect to the raw material pigments with surface treatment, the much more elegant
and smooth feeling in use can be completed, and these days, polysolixane (SI) treatment is very
popular for makeup products. The long-lasting effect is also a very important functionality for
makeup products and especially for face makeup. A lot of women use makeup products to
maintain their soft and smooth skin for a long time. For women with oily complexions, lipids
secreted from skin tissue collapse the makeup finishing and the surface of the finishing skin
becomes glossy, since lipid from skin tissue is miscible with pigments and binder in makeup
cosmetics. This disadvantage will not be solved with SI treatment, since polysiloxane is
miscible with oil. To overcome these problems of raw material pigments for cosmetics, such as
poor dispersibility, high activity against skin, and collapse of makeup finishing by lipid from
skin tissue, there exists a surface treatment using perfluoroalkyl phosphate (10). Fluoro-
compounds are used for several kinds of fields to avoid water and oil. This treatment showed an
excellent water and oil repellency and also a good dispersibility to organic and inorganic
pigments, and an ability to depress the activity of ultrafine pigments. Other surface treatments can
be carried out to give, for example, much more UV cut effect to pigments. Several types of organic
low–molecular weight UV absorbers are commonly used, such as benzophenone and p-amino
benzoic acid. It is also known that ultrafine titanium dioxides and zinc oxides absorb UV light,
especially zinc oxides, which absorbs UVA and UVB both. However, it is recognized that titanium
dioxide is not so stable against UV rays. To overcome the disadvantage of the photostability, new
technology to coat titanium dioxide in high uniformity was explored, and a novel silica-coated
titanium dioxide with broad spectrum protection against UV rays was developed (11). Other
surface treatments with polymer materials were carried out to give much more UV cut effect to
pigments (12). This allows the formulator to avoid the main disadvantage of physical sunscreens,
namely, the visible whitening that occurs when titanium dioxide and zinc oxide are used in high
concentrations to obtain a high SPF. These novel polymer surface treatments, such as organic
polymers (teflon and silicones) or active ingredients (collagen, elastin, and vitamine E), give better
properties of cosmetic makeups, and use of polymer or polymer matrix system are very safe
compared with use of ultrafine titanium dioxides or zinc oxides.
Face Powders
Face powders provide coverage of complexion imperfections, oil control, a matte finish, and
tactile smoothness to the skin. Powders give a good lasting effect to foundation makeup and
possess oil-absorbing properties that are very useful for oily-skin types. Free powders are used
to fix the foundation and compact powders to retouch one’s face during day. Face powder is
more complicated and made by a mixture of products: Talc and serecite (to help to spread),
chalk or kaolin (to give moisture-absorbing qualities), magnesium stearate (gives adherence),
zinc oxide and titanium oxide (to help cover the skin thorougly), and pigments (for color). The
use of mica in powder formulations improves skin feel, product application, and skin
adhesion. The favourable effects are obtained with wet ground micas that have a particle size
of <15 mm. Mica can also be modified by coating with inorganic or organic materials to
produce another large group of fillers (spherical, special, and surface modified). Spherical
fillers are widely used to improve skin feel. There are a variety of materials available, the
organic types consisting mainly of polyamides, nylon spheres and inorganic types consisting
mainly of silica, both as solid or hollow spheres. The improvement of skin feel is attributed to
the ball bearing–like action of the spheres between other powder ingredients in the
formulation and the spherical filler. When spherical materials are used, there is also an
increase in the viscosity of the emulsion, allowing for a reduction of viscosity modifiers in the
final formulation. Bismuth oxychloride (BiOCl), a fine white powder with a high bulk density,
is well known as a pearlescent pigment, but it can also be used as a filler with no luster when in
a particular crystal form. It has relatively low oil absorption characteristics and also gives rise
to excellent compressibility when used in pressed powder formulations. Its hydrophobic
character and good affinity with the skin also improves the skin adhesion and wear properties
Decorative Products
395

=== Page 413 ===
of powder and makeup products. However, one disadvantage of BiOCl has been a low-light
stability. Nowadays, BiOCl is much more stable to UV light. Special fillers are a group of fillers
that are made up of several components, which combine their individual advantages when
they are processed together into a composite material. Coated mica pigments, for example, are
often found as light-diffusing pigments’ agents in color cosmetics, where fine particle–size
micas enhance the light diffusion properties of the material coated on the surface of the
mica. Mica can also be coated with very small particles of metal oxides, allowing ease of
incorporation into liquid formulations. Examples of coating materials for micas are titanium
dioxide (e.g., low loster pigment), barium sulfate, and BiOCl, as well as organic compounds.
For surface-modified fillers, most coating materials are organic polymers (collagen, elastin, and
vitamine E). Powders also contain between 10% and 20% of organic texture agents (polymers)
or mineral agents (boron nitride and silica), preservatives, anti-oxidants, and perfumes
(neutral or more sophisticated) can also be added there. Table 2 collects some possible raw
materials for foundations and powders.
Eye Makeup
Eye makeup consists of three major categories: mascaras, eyeshadows, and eyeliners. Mascaras
thicken, sheathe, separate, and lengthen eyelashes to obtain an intense look. Eyeliners help
draw a precise line at the base of eyelashes, and eyeshadows bring light to the look and
highlight the color of the iris.
Mascaras
Among all the makeup products, mascara formula requires a particular development. The
choice of mascara depends on the type of eyelashes (short or long, stiff or curved, poor or
bushy, and fair or brown) and of the required effect (lengthened, curved, and\or thicker
eyelashes). Liquid mascaras are the most popular modern formulation, and they can be
divided into water-based, solvent-based and water/solvent hybrid varieties. Water-based
mascaras are formulated from waxes (e.g., beeswax, carnauba wax, and synthetic wax), water,
pigments, which are often iron oxides, and resins dissolved in water. The water evaporates
readily, creating a fast-drying product, which thickens and darkness the eyelashes. Some
water-based mascaras, very rich in wax (30%), are labelled waterproof or water resistant. To
color eyelashes, inorganic pigments are the most commonly used because the vast majority of
mascaras are black. Note that certain pigments, like cochineal carmine, may generate some
problems such as the coloration of contact lenses. The formulae also contain antioxidizers to
avoid the rancid smell of fatty substances and preservatives, which protect the eye from any
risk of infection. Vitamins and hydrocarbon volatile or silicon solvents can also be used to
improve the performance of the makeup. Concering the solvent-based mascaras, they are
formulated with petroleum distillates to which pigments (e.g., iron dioxides, ultramarine blue,
etc.) and waxes (candellila wax, ozokerite, and hydrogenated castor oil) are added, making
them waterproof. If it is clear that the makeup effect depends on the formula, it is also
important to consider the type of brush and the diameter of the aperture of the mascara tube.
Indeed, it must automatically adjust the quantity of product on the brush to avoid loads on
the eyelashes during application. The packaging also must be totally airtight to avoid the
degradation and oxydation of the formulation. Thus, to obtain a good application on the
eyelashes, it is necessary to develop a compromise between the mascara formula viscosity and
the brush type. A rheological approach can be made through the rheological characterization
in situ of mascara pastes with the brushes (13). This procedure used to quantify the take up of
mascara brush in the container allows to visualize the influences of the shaft, the bristle length,
and the hardness and pattern on the take up, therefore to characterize the product transfer.
Eyeshadows and Eyeliners
Eyeshadows are a cosmetic designed to impart color, primarily to the upper eyelid. The
formulations of eyeshadows are identical to those of compact powders for the face, but the color
range is wider. Application is helped by tiny particle size, flattering the eyelid by giving a
smooth rather than crepey appearance. Eyeliners are mainly liquid formulations using ultrafine
pigments.
396
Korichi and Tranchant

=== Page 414 ===
Table 2
Possible Raw Materials for Foundations and Powders
Pigments and mineral charges
White
Colored
Unifying charges
Mineral charges light
Silicones
Active
- Titanium dioxide
- Talcs
- Pearl pigments
(mica, titanium
dioxide–coated
mica, bismuth
oxychloride)
- Iron oxides (Yellow,
red, black)
- Ultramarine blue
- Colored pigments
and pearls (mica þ
iron oxides, mica-titanium
dioxides þ iron oxides)
- Nylon (orgasol)
- Polymethylmetacrylates
- Silica
- Boron nitride
- Soft focus (light diffusing)
- Photochromic
- Light correcting
(auto-adaptative)
- Dimethicone
- Volatile cyclomethicone
- Silicone gum blends
Emulsifying
- Cyclomethicone and
dimethicone copolyol
- Vitamin C, A, and E.
- UV filters
- Enzymes
- Phospholipids
- Moisturizing agents
(Glycerin)
Decorative Products
397

=== Page 415 ===
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN SKIN AND MAKEUP PRODUCTS
Physical appearance, and more particularly physical attractiveness, is one of the most
important determinants of interpersonal attraction in the early stages of many relationships
(14,15), and it is obvious that the face is the part of the human body, which attracts the most
attention (16,17). Thanks to makeup products, it is quite possible to bring out certain
characteristics of the face or, on the contrary, to lighten them to achieve a degree of attraction
for all types of face (18–20). In all cases, the perception of a makeup is an interaction between
the light, the makeup product or raw-materials, which compose it, and the human skin. Two
main types of interaction can be observed: visual interactions, where the optical way of light is
modified by the optical properties of cosmetic ingredients and the relief of the skin surface and
biophysical interactions, where the finished makeup is perturbed by the biochemical and
mechanical functions of the skin surface. Concerning the visual interactions, they are mainly
generated by pigments with specific effects (21): perlescents, iridescent effects (color changes
according to the angle of observation), thermochromic (color changes according to the
temperature), photoadaptive (preserve a radiant complexion following the lighting con-
ditions), or soft focus effects (22–24). These soft focus pigments, mainly composed of polymers,
micas, and talcs covered with rough or spherical particles of small diameters, such as silica or
titanium dioxide, are used to optically reduce the appearance of wrinkles. These effects are
obtained by optimizing outlines of wrinkles and reducing the difference of brightness due to
diffuse reflection. Concerning the biophysical interactions, it is known that behavior of a
makeup product can be modified by the biochemical and biophysical properties of the skin.
For example, a woman’s skin type and her facial movements throughout the day actually
remove the foundation from the face. Foundation tends to shift and wear off during the day
and migrate into the fine lines of the face. The outside environment such as air pollution,
smoke, sun, and stress that we feel in the current world are also factors, which can disrupt the
normal balance of the skin (e.g., skin discoloration or extreme dehydration) and therefore
modify the behavior of makeup products. The perceptions of a makeup can create other
interactions based on the relation existing between the pleasure felt after application of a
makeup product and psychological and social parameters (25). These interactions are difficult
to define because they often include physiological and psychological attributes. Indeed, it is
difficult to quantify precisely how much pleasure a person derives from using a makeup.
Overall, makeup acts and stimulates three of our senses: the touch (which encompasses all
sensations from the body surface), the smell (fragrance), and the sight (the process of becoming
and looking beautiful). The positive stimulation of these senses by makeup can induce sensory as
well as psychological pleasure. Indeed, in a previous study whose subject was to explain the
reasons that motivate women to make up, we observed clearly a high implication of psychological
traits in the makeup functions (26,27). This positive stimulation can also contribute to a healthy
mind and body through enhanced functioning of the body’s immune system (28). An excellent
article by Le´veˆque (29) on the relationship between appearance and health underlines the
effects of makeup product on the mental health of a women who is badly affected by a serious
illness or who is still in the process of creating and presenting her own image and personality.
With facial makeup, women become more confident, physically attractive, enhance their
well-being, and act more positively toward the external world. The implications of facial
attractiveness are equally important across all of the stages of life, associated with greater
or lesser sensitivities to the social interactions. For example, with changes in age, the
psychological effects change (30). The young woman will use makeup to capture the eye of
others and is perceived as having a more favorable personality, whereas a mature woman will
use makeup rather to enhance her feelings of self-satisfaction. Beyond the simple application
of colorful products on the face, makeup appears as a holistic technique that modifies not only
one’s appearance but also helps to cope with one’s self-image, emotions, and mood.
QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF PROPERTIES OF MAKEUP PRODUCTS
Over the past few years, cosmetic research has enabled the makeup product to become a high-
technology product, claiming some similar cosmetic properties to those of skin care products
(hydration, protection against free radicals, etc.) as well as new physical properties (e.g., long
398
Korichi and Tranchant

=== Page 416 ===
lasting or no transfer effects). Although qualitative evaluation (mainly obtained through
consumers’ perception and experts’ evaluation) is commonly used and remains indispensable
to prove the effects of makeup products (e.g., color, comfort, or lasting effect), it is more and
more necessary to associate it with instrumental data. Some may be obtained through devices
already used for the evaluation of skin care products, such as the Corneometer1, which can
demonstrate a moisturizing effect (31). However, the most representative effects are those,
which are associated with a visual effect, which is the main property of a makeup product.
Video imaging appears as a good method to prove the efficacy of makeup products. Indeed,
thanks to high-resolution video cameras and sophisticated image analysis sofwares, we can
visualize what the consumer perceives of the product (concerning either the whole face or
smaller areas) and at the same time to associate some quantitative information. However,
video imaging has its limits, and in this case, biophysical methods can be very useful to
quantify certain properties.
Lip Makeup
Quantification of the Color, Brightness, and Streakiness
The color parameters can be achieved either by reflectance spectrophotometry of the optical
spectrum of visible light reflected (Spectrophometer CM-508i1, CM-20021, Konica Minolta
Business Solutions Europe GmbH, Germany) or by reflectance tristimulus colorimetry
(Minolta Chromameter CR-2001, CR-3001, Minolta, Osaka, Japan) following the CIE
(Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage) recommendations (32). These methods give
quantitative information on the color but are limited to a small analysis surface, from
7 mm2 to a few square centimeters according to the device used. And these techniques require
direct contact between the made-up skin surface and the device, which generates shrinking at
every measurement and therefore modified the aspect and the long-term behavior of the
product. To avoid this phenomenon, color can be evaluated by image analysis. Thanks to this
technique, it is possible to study skin areas of various sizes, take measurements without any
contact with the skin, and analyze the image pixel by pixel (a word invented from “picture
element,” which is the basic unit of programmable color), providing quantitative information
according to localization. In the case of lipstick, the global color of the made-up area and the
shades most represented in the global color can be quantified. Thanks to the development of
specific data-processing programs (33). For example, a segmentation method by maximization
of the entropy and an algorithm based on the principle of the probabilistic segmentation were
used to separate the color information sent back by the skin to the makeup area. It is also
possible to evaluate the streakiness, which represents the amount of lipstick in the small lines
surrounding the lips, and the brightness (Fig. 1). Concerning the streakiness, the principle
consists in extracting the surface of the lipstick that has migrated (lips þ streakiness), smooth
out the outline, and calculate the difference between that and the surface of the unsmoothed
lips. All that remains is to divide the calculated surface by the perimeter of the smoothed lips
to obtain a streakiness index, independent of the morphology. The brightness assessment is
more complex. Indeed, the bright zones are not necessarily the part of the image where the
pixels get closer to white. A darker lipstick having the same brightness surface in pixels as a
clear lipstick will be perceived by the human eye as more glossy. Then, the brightness
assessment is realized by calculating the difference of contrast between two adjacent pixels.
From these different parameters (color, brightness, and streakiness), the long-lasting properties
of a lipstick can be evaluated.
Quantification of the Moisturizing Effect
The hydration state of the skin surface is commonly evaluated by an indirect method based on
the measurement of electrical conductivity (34). Various experimental instruments are
commercially available such as the Corneometer (CM-820, CM-825, Courage and Khazaka,
Germany) based on the measurement of the capacitance and the Nova Derm Phase Meter DPM
9003 (Nova1 Technology Corporation, Portsmouth, New Hampshire, U.S.) based on the
meaurement of skin impedance. Thanks to this small diameter probe (5 mm), the Nova DPM
9003 is perfectly adapted to measure the electrical properties of lip surfaces (35). However, this
device requires a sufficient hydration level of lips to show differences after application of
moisturizing lipstick. In all cases, the measurement protocol used to quantify the hydration
Decorative Products
399

=== Page 417 ===
state of the lips is complex, especially for long-term studies and comparisons between lipsticks.
Indeed, one week of “wash out” is necessary to obtain a constant physiological state of lips,
and only one lipstick can be studied at the same time on the same volunteer. To screen many
lipstick formulae, an original method consists in applying lipstick on the forearm zone after
delipidation of the skin surface with an acetone/ether (1:1) mixture during 30 minutes (36).
Once the lipstick is applied (the same quantity, which is applied on lips), it stays in contact
with the skin for one day. Then, the hydration of the skin surface is measured with a
Corneometer the next day after a standardized wash. The results after one week showed that a
lipstick containing a glycerin/water mixture significantly increases the hydration of the skin
compared with the same base of lipstick without glycerin. Note that before testing the efficacy
of a moisturizing lipstick, it is recommended to check the physicochemical properties of the
pigments and raw materials contained in the formulation, and more particularly those
properties, which possess an electrical conductivity.
Eye Makeup
Evaluation of the Curving and Lengthening Power of a Mascara
The image analysis can also be used to evaluate the curving power of a mascara. The principle
consists in visualizing the profile of the eyelashes by a video camera placed perpendicularly to
the eye and calculating from the image obtained the curving power with regard to two axes
situated at 908 from each other. The 08 to 1808 axis corresponds to the eyelid and the 908 to 2708
axis to the ciliary edge. The angles created by the highest and farthest eyelash from the eyelid
are measured, and the average angle calculated. The curving power of mascara is then
determined by calculating the difference between the two average angles: angle 2 (after
makeup) – angle 1 (before makeup) (Fig. 2). The quantification of the lengthening power is also
possible by measuring the length (in pixels) of the farthest eyelash before and after application
of the mascara.
Figure 1
Extraction of the brightness and streakiness.
400
Korichi and Tranchant

=== Page 418 ===
Face Makeup
Certain makeup products such as foundations and tinted day creams (which are a colored
extension of skin care products) contain some raw materials in their formulation that we usually
find in skin care products. Although their efficacy on the skin has already been demonstrated
by several noninvasive methods, such as the measurement of epidermal capacitance,
transepidermal water loss, biomechanical properties, UV protection, or free radical scavengers,
their incorporation in makeup formulations can generate several problems of compatibility with
pigments and some difficulties in the efficacy assessment. The best known and most difficult
claims to quantify are those in relation to the lasting properties (color, degradation of the
makeup surface film, migration of pigments in fine wrinkles, and modification of the shade), the
intransferability on surfaces like the skin or clothes, and skin radiance.
Quantification of the No Transfer Properties of a Foundation
Foundation is considered no transfer only if it is insensitive to two types of constraints: a
transfer by contact, called a “static transfer,” and a transfer by friction, called a “dynamic
transfer.” To reproduce the effect observed by the consumers (e.g., transfer on the collar of
blouses or pullovers), a device to simulate these two types of transfer has been developed in
our laboratory. It is composed of a probe used to fix the chosen support and to control the
contact pressure between the support and made-up surface, and a motorized arm allowing it
to move laterally, over a known distance and at a constant speed. Once the transfer is made,
the foundation print is digitalized by a color video camera. The image is then treated to extract
and count the pixels associated with the colored print (Fig. 3). A foundation will be considered
no transfer if no pixels are detected. For very short-term effects (e.g., 5 minutes after makeup),
the no transfer properties of a foundation can be evaluated on the forearm. For long-term no
transfer effects, it is better to carry out the study on the forehead because the sebaceous glands’
activity can modify the behavior of the makeup in time.
Quantification of the Long-Lasting Properties of a Foundation
The appearance of the made-up skin is dependent on many optical and physiological
properties of the skin. The appearance is mainly determined by the factors of color and texture.
Color perception is associated with light and the way it is reflected. The texture depends on the
Figure 2
Measurement of the curving power of a mascara.
Decorative Products
401

=== Page 419 ===
brightness and the relief, respectively, attributable to light diffusion on the skin surface and the
distribution of foundation layers. A foundation will be considered long lasting if the made-up
skin preserves these properties in time. Whereas the color is the most studied and explored
field, few studies have been carried out on the behavior of the skin texture in time after
makeup (37–39). To follow the behavior of a makeup film, a noninvasive method based on the
determination of changes in the intensity of dermis autofluorescence excited by UV irradiation
(40,41) can be used. The instrumental setup for fluorescence measurements consists of a
commercially available luminescence spectrometer (LS-50B Fluorescence Spectrometer1,
Perkin Elmer, U.K.) equipped with flexible fiber optics surrounded by a metallic cylinder of
about 1.5 cm in diameter for in vivo measurements. Skin fluorescence is induced by a radiation
at 325 nm (UV light in UVB range). The excitation light was transmitted perpendicularly to the
skin area and the emitted light was collected and transported at the emission slit. The emission
spectra of the skin site (e.g., the forehead) present a peak at 390 nm and additional shoulder at
440 nm (42). These two wavelengths are associated with the fluorophores of the skin, such as
collagen and elastin, both major compounds of human dermis, and depend on the skin’s
chromophores, which absorb UV radiation. The application of a makeup product creates a
physical and chemical barrier between the excitation light and the skin, which decreases the
skin’s autofluorescence response (Fig. 4). The makeup film created by foundation layers will be
considered long lasting if the emission spectrum carried out just after makeup is similar to the
following ones, considering that raw materials used in formulations do not absorb UV
radiation. The long-lasting effect can be studied on the first emission peak (l ¼ 390 nm) as well
as on the second one (l ¼ 440 nm). The other factor, which defines the appearance of the made-
up skin texture is the brightness. In relation to the degree of brightness, the skin may appear
bright and healthy or dull and unhealthy. Brightness can be brought by the foundation itself or
by the sebaceous gland’s activity, which gives the skin an oily appearance (43). There exist a
Figure 3
System allowing to simulate a static and dynamic transfer. Image analysis and extraction of pixels
containing the transferred pigments.
402
Korichi and Tranchant

=== Page 420 ===
variety of established methods to estimate the oily skin (44,45). For measuring brightness,
methods are mainly based on the evaluation of the intensity reflected in the specular direction,
when the surface to be analyzed is illuminated by a beam of light with a fixed angle of
incidence. However, these methods are not easy to use on the skin surface because they require
an analysis surface as flat as possible. To avoid these constraints, brightness assessment can be
performed using the same instrumental setup for in vivo fluorescence measurements. To
record only reflection and eliminate fluorescence of different wavelength, the fluorescence
spectrometer (LS-50B) is used and operated in the so-called synchronous mode, i.e., both
monochromators (excitation and emission) are moved synchronously through the whole
spectrum (250–700 nm) with a wavelength difference of zero (Dl ¼ 0 nm). Certain chromophores
of the skin (melanin, etc.) and the color of makeup can influence the visible reflection spectra of
human skin. For this reason, the spectral differences observed before and after makeup will be
preferentially studied and compared in the UV range (250–400 nm), where the wavelength
giving the maximum of difference will be extracted. As for the study of the makeup film long
lasting, the matte effect will be considered long lasting if the reflectance value, recorder just after
makeup, is similar to the following ones.
Quantification of Skin Radiance
There is no universal definition of the skin radiance. Each individual perceives it in a different
way because it often includes physiological and psychological attributes. If there are
differences in the perception of the skin radiance, dermatologists and experts in cosmetology
consider that the complexion must reflect the general health of each human. The main factors
that affect the skin complexion are the skin color, surface texture, luminosity, and mainly
microcirculation, which gives the skin a rosy appearance. The skin radiance being a global
phenomenon, it is very important to study the interaction between all these visual effects
before any quantitative and qualitative interpretation. Although the qualitative evaluation
(besides the consumers’ perception obtained by questionnaire and experts’ evaluation) (46) is
commonly used and remains indispensable to prove the effects of cosmetic products used to
improve the skin radiance, we are searching for more instrumental data. To approach the
skin radiance in a scientific way, there are very few instrumental techniques. Color and
Figure 4
Measurement of the skin’s autofluorescence before and after makeup. Study on forehead.
Decorative Products
403

=== Page 421 ===
microcirculation are the most studied and explored fields, but these methods only give
quantitative information limited to a small analysis surface according to the device used. To
obtain what is closer to the consumers’ perception, the existing conditions of the skin
radiance can be performed via pluridisciplinary approaches combining digital image
analysis, consumers’ perception, and experts’ evaluation. From a round table meeting,
several items linked to skin radiance but also taking into account emotional, psychological,
and behavioral factors are defined. Then, a self-assessment questionnaire built according to
the information obtained is proposed to experts to evaluate the skin radiance perceived. In
parallel, facial images are carried out using a video imaging, and algorithms are required to
extract skin parameters such as the brightness, the grain of the skin, skin color, and the
homogeneity of the color. The comparison between image analysis and expertise allows
evaluation of the degree to which each of the independent parameters contributes to the skin
radiance perception, and suggests a mathematical model to quantify the global radiance
phenomenon (47).
Nail Makeup
Few studies have been carried out on the behavior of nail enamel. The brightness of nail
enamel can be quantified by the luminescence spectrometer (LS-50B) for in vivo measurements
used in synchronous mode. However, the irregular shape of the nail requires that the diameter
of the optical probe be reduced (3 mm) to adapt to the surface of the nail.
CONCLUSION
The heightened technology of makeup products (pigments, formulations, etc.), the sensory
interactions based on the skin-brain connection, and more stronger claims are accompanied by
the development of specific evaluation methods used to quantify these improvements and to
prove the claimed efficacy. In cosmetology, the quantitative assessment of the visual effects of
a makeup product becomes more and more complementary to a qualitative evaluation
(questionnaires according to consumers’ perception and expert evaluation). Certain quanti-
tative studies are restricted to a small surface of measurement and require a direct contact with
the skin. Video imaging appears as a method of the future to prove the efficacy of makeup
products. Today, this technology allows us to study precisely the color, brightness, or
streakiness of a lipstick, but also some physical properties, such as the curving and lengthening
power of mascara or the no transfer properties of a foundation or a lipstick. Technological
progress, combined with video imaging and data processing, allows us to imagine, in a near
future, the appearance of new and more sophisticated visualization tools that will permit us to
study some visual effects, which are still difficult to quantify such as certain optical effects (soft
focus, photochromic effects, etc.), interactions between the product when you make up your
face (distribution and migration of the pigments during the makeup process, etc.), or again,
emotions generated during the makeup process. Note that biophysical methods can also be
very useful when they are used differently from their main function.
REFERENCES
1. Graham JA, Jouhar JA. The effects of cosmetics on person perception. Int J Cosmetic Sci 1981; 3:199–210.
2. Clermont-Gallerande HD. Lipstick formulation: past, present and future. Color Cosmetics Summit,
Nice, France, March 26–28, 2001:1–13.
3. Tranchant JF, Poulin A. Characterization of Texture by Rheological Studies during Liptsick
Manufacture. 20th IFSCC Poster 176, 20th IFSCC Congress; Cannes, France; Sept 14–19, 1998; pp 1–7.
4. Japanese Patent H10-194930.
5. Rohn CL. Rheological characterization of coatings for fabrics and fibers. J Coated Fabrics 1990; 19:181–192.
6. Napper DH. Steric stabilization. J Colloı¨d Interface Sci 1977; 58(2):390–407.
7. Rheometrics newsletter. Predicting the stability of dispersions, 1990.
8. Ohno K, Kumagai S, Tanaka T. Development of Photochromic Titanium Dioxide and its Application
to Make-up Foundation. 17th IFSCC Congress; Yokohama, Japan; Oct 13–16, 1992; A212 pp 640–665.
9. Germer TA, Nadal ME. Modeling the appearance of special effect pigment coatings. Surf Scattering
Diffr Adv Metrol SPIE 4444 2001; 77–86.
404
Korichi and Tranchant

=== Page 422 ===
10. Tanaka T, Tsuruta E, Waki M, et al. Preparation of Surface Treated Pigments with Perfluoroalkyl
Phosphate. 18th IFSCC Poster 027, 18th IFSCC Congress; Venice, Italy; Oct 3–6 1994; pp 242–253.
11. Takama M. Properties of Newly Developed Silica Coated Titanium Dioxide. 20th IFSCC Poster 125,
20th IFSCC Congress; Cannes, France; Sept 14–19, 1998; pp 1–10.
12. Tanaka T, Nogami N, Shimomura M. Development of UV Cut Pigments with Polymer Surface
Treatment. Poster 089, 20th IFSCC Congress; Cannes, France; Sept 14–19, 1998; pp 1–6.
13. Tranchant JF, Poulin A, Marchal P, et al. How to Measure the Rheological Behaviour and the Take Up
by Means of Mascara Brush in the Container. 20th IFSCC Poster 95, 20th IFSCC Congress; Cannes,
France; Sept 14–19, 1998; pp 1–6.
14. Marwick A. Beauty in History: Society, Politics and Personal Appearance c. 1500 to the Present. First
US edition. New York: Thames & Hudson, 1989.
15. Nakdimen KA. The physiognomic basis of sexual stereotyping. Am J Psych 1984; 141:499–503.
16. Kenrick T, Keefe RC. Age preference in mates reflects sex differences in human strategies. Behav
Brain Sci 1992; 15:75–133.
17. Kowner R, Ogawa T. Toward a theory of the unviversal determinants of physical attractiveness
preferences. Tsukuba Psychol Res 1993; 15:219–224.
18. Ikeuchi M, Inoue S, Nishikata K. Optically-designed Makeup for Enhancing the Quality of Smile. 5th
ASCS Conference, Bangkok, Thailand, February 7–10, 2001.
19. Troje NF, Bulthoff HH. Face recognition under varying poses: the role of texture and shape. Vision
Res 1996; 36(12):1761–1771.
20. Sieroff E. Analytic Processing and 3/4 Views Superiority in Face Recognition. Poster in the annual
meeting of Theoretical and experimental Neuropsychology tennet XI. Montreal, Canada; June 15–17,
2000.
21. Se´minaire couleur et effets spe´ciaux, Euroforum, 2001.
22. Nakamura N, Takasuka Y, Takatsuka I. Blurring of Wrinkles Through Control of Optical Properties.
Reprint of the 14th IFSCC Congress, Barcelona, Spain, September 16–19, 1986.
23. Emmert R. Quantification of the soft-focus effect. Cosmetics & Toiletries Magazine 1996; 111:57–61.
24. Desmarthon E, Hericher D, Seu-Salerno M. A light-diffusion concept for antiaging effects in makeup
formulations. Cosmetics and Toiletries Magazine 2002; 117:65–72.
25. Graham JA, Kligman AM. The psychology of cosmetic treatments. New York: Praeger Publishers,
1985.
26. Korichi R, Pelle de Queral D, Gazano G, et al. Psychological Approach of the Hedonic Process
Implicated in the Make-Up of Human Face and Relation with Morphometric Parameters. 24th IFSCC
Congress, Osaka, Japan, October 16–19, 2006.
27. Korichi R, Pelle de Queral D, Gazano G, et al. Why women use make-up: implication of psychological
traits in makeup functions. J Cosmet Sci 2008; 59(2):127–137.
28. Kan C, Kimura S. Psychoneuroimmunological benefits of cosmetics. pp 769–784, 18th IFSCC Congress,
Venice, Italy, October 3–6, 1994.
29. Le´veˆque JL. Apparence et sante´: Le roˆle des cosme´tiques. Rev Med Liege 1996; 11:721–725.
30. Kligman AM, Graham JA. The psychology of cutaneous aging. In: Aging and the Skin. New York:
Raven press, 1989:347–355.
31. Heinrich U, Koop U, Leneveu-Duchemin MC, et al. Multicentre comparison of skin hydration in terms
of physical-, physiological- and product-dependent parameters by the capacitive method (Corneometer
CM 825). Int J Cosmet Sci 2003; 25(1–2):45–53.
32. Bourbigot G, Collin B, Chanteau S, et al. Study of the resistance of lipstick. 20th IFSCC Poster 051b,
20th IFSCC Congress; Cannes, France; September 14–19, 1998; pp 1–5.
33. Korichi R, Provost R, Heuse`le C, et al. Quantitative assessment of properties of make up products by
video imaging: application to lipsticks. Skin Res Technol 2000; 6:222–229.
34. Tagami H. Measurement of Electrical Conductance and Impedance. In: Serup J, Jemec BE. eds.
Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. CRC Press, 1995:159–170.
35. Miller DL. Application of a Special Electrical Porperty Measurement Protocol to Lips. 9th
International Symposium on Bioengineering and the Skin, Sendai, Japan, October 19–20, 1992.
36. Imokawa G. Importance of intercellular lipids in water-retention porperties of the stratum corneum:
induction and recovery of surfactant dry skin. Arch Dermatol Res 1989; 281:45–51.
37. Minami K, Ito M, Ojima N, et al. Optical determination of skin texture. IFSCC Magazine 2000; 3(2):5–9.
38. Shimmoto K, Honda T. A new method for direct and instantaneous measurement of skin texture.
Poster 029, 20th IFSCC Congress; Cannes, France; Sept 14–19, 1998; pp 1–16.
39. Draelos ZD. Degradation and migration of facial foundations. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001; 45(4):542–543.
40. Sinichkin YP, Utts SR, Meglinskii IV, et al. Spectroscopy of Human Skin in vivo: Fluorescence Spectra.
Optics and Spectroscopy 1996; 80(3):383–389.
41. Suaermann G, Herpens A, Drewes D, et al. Fluorescence-free UV/VIS reflection spectra of human
skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1993; 44:35–52.
Decorative Products
405

=== Page 423 ===
42. Leffell DJ, Stetz ML, Milstone LM, et al. In vivo fluorescence of human skin. Arch Dermatol 1988;
124:1514–1518.
43. Pochi PE, Strauss JS, Downing DT. Age-related changes in sebaseous gland activity. J Invest Dermatol
1979; 73:108–111.
44. Dikstein S, Zlotogorski A, Avriel E, et al. Comparison of Sebumeter and Lipometer. Bioeng Skin 1987;
3:197–207.
45. Pierard GE, Pierard-Franchimont C, Marks S, et al. EEMCO guidance for in vivo assessment of skin
greasiness. Skin Pharmacol Apll Skin Physiol 2000; 13:372–389.
46. Musnier C, Piquemal P, Beau P, et al. Visual evaluation in vivo of complexion radiance using C.L.B.T.
sensory methodology. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10(1):50–56.
47. Baret M, Bensimon N, Coronel S, et al. Characterization and quantification of the skin radiance
through new digital image analysis. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12:254–260.
406
Korichi and Tranchant

=== Page 424 ===
38
Skin Radiance Measurement
A. Petitjean and P. Humbert
Research and Studies Center on the Integument (CERT), Saint-Jacques University Hospital, Besanc¸on, France
S. Mac-Mary and J. M. Sainthillier
Skinexigence SAS, Saint-Jacques University Hospital, Besanc¸on, France
INTRODUCTION
The term “complexion” has always attracted attention; it had to be white from the antiquity to
contemporary times, and then tanned from the 1920s. Nevertheless, we are at the beginning of
a new era, where a tanned complexion is no longer fashionable; a young homogeneous
complexion without imperfection is now the preferred option. Today, the essential preoccu-
pation is not so much the color of the complexion but its texture, which should evoke youth,
health, and happiness (1).
The term “radiance” refers to shine and light. A vivid red is a red that shines. Radiance
also defines what arouses admiration, attention, glitter, and magnificence.
In fact, the radiance/complexion is the mirror of general health, both physical and
psychological. A gray skin, a “blotchy complexion” may reflect bad looks because of great
fatigue, weariness, hormonal status, emotional states (sadness, stress, etc.), illness (dysfunction
of vital organs such as the liver etc.), nutrition deficiency or excess, tobacco, alcohol, pollution,
seasons (2–6). Inversely “peach-colored skin” reflects a smooth, pink and velvety skin, and
good health. The complexion plays essential psychological and social roles (1).
Skin radiance is referred to without any precise definition and quantifiable appreciation
data. All the parameters that constitute it and their relative proportions are difficult to list. The
skin radiance seems to be a balanced mixture of color, itself mostly influenced by the skin
microcirculation, of light reflection, and more globally of texture of the skin surface (1). Its
study therefore implies the quantification of each of these components.
METHODS
When the light meets the skin surface, a small quantity [about 5% (7)] is reflected directly while
the major part penetrates the different layers of the skin. The specular light gives its luminous
aspect whereas the back scattered light (Fig. 1) gives the complexion (peachy-color). In other
words, specular reflection (depending on the nature and state of the surface of the skin)
explains the glow, absorption phenomena (depending on the skin’s chromophore content)
explain its hue, whereas diffusion phenomena (depending mostly on the collagen content)
define its saturation.
The skin color depends mainly on the melanin as well as the hemoglobin concentrations
and distributions. The melanin (brown) absorbs all wavelengths, but this absorption decreases
considerably from purple to red, which makes the melanin look like a mixture of gray (global
absorption) and yellow (significant absorption of blue). Hemoglobin looks red because it
absorbs selectively the green and therefore retro-diffuses a light where this complementary
color is missing.
The hemoglobin plays an important part in the skin radiance, which is usually perceived
as “pink” skin. An indirect way to assess the radiance is consequently to study the skin
microcirculation.
Assessment of Skin Microcirculation
The hemoglobin transports the oxygen inside the red globules: if there is not enough oxygen,
the face will be gray and dull. If the microcirculation is effectively stimulated, the light will
more easily reflect off the red blood cells at the source of the skin color.

=== Page 425 ===
The skin microcirculation is therefore an important factor of the dull complexion:
l Under stress, catecholamines are delivered in the skin, inducing vasoconstriction (and
thus skin pallor) (2,9,10),
l With tiredness (lack of sleep and/or intensive activity), the body reacts by sending
more blood to vital organs, and the cutaneous microcirculation is “sluggish” (6).
l With pollution and smoking, the microvessels lose their colors (grayish aspect of the
skin) (4–6,11,12).
l With aging, papillar capillary loops disappear, inducing a loss in dermal nutritional
vessel density and surface area for exchange (13).
Among the existing available techniques, capillaroscopy and videocapillaroscopy allow
direct visualization of the capillary network in vivo. After depositing a drop of oil to enhance
skin transparency, an optical magnifying system is used to visualize its vascular network.
Different levels of magnification can be used to assess the surface of the microvasculature
structure as well as its color (Fig. 2) (14,15).
Colorimeters
The most logical way to assess skin complexion is to study its color directly. Taylor et al.
described in 2006 the different techniques available (16). Among them, reflectance spectros-
copy, chromameters, and narrowband reflectometers should be the most frequently used. The
latter are dedicated to the assessment of erythema or pigmentation (by measuring more
specifically the skin chromophores) (17,18).
The color variations of the skin surface can be measured by reflectance spectroscopy,
spectrocolorimeter (CM2600D, Konica Minolta Sensing) or chromameter (CR400, Konica
Minolta Sensing). These devices have sensitivities corresponding to those of the human eyes,
but the measurements are performed in standardized conditions using the same light source.
Figure 1
Optical pathways in the
skin (the layer is so thin in the
stratum corneum and the epidermis
that its contribution to remittance
other than specular is minimal over
the entire visible and near infrared
regions). Source: From Ref. 8.
Figure 2
(A) (&7 mm2) A magnification of 100 allows to quantify the vascularization network (arrows show the
capillary loops and the vessels) of the skin, whereas (B) (&28 mm2) a magnification of 50 allows to quantify the
skin redness.
408
Petitjean et al.

=== Page 426 ===
The Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (CIE) has defined the spectral characteristics of
several types of typical illuminants (the D65 corresponds to average daylight and is usually
used as the reference) (19).
The results are expressed in the standard L*a*b* system [CIE LAB 1976 (20)]. The L* in
this space corresponds to the luminance axis (0 for the black and 100 for the white)
characterizing the separation between bright and dark; a* and b* form the other two color
orthogonal axes, with a* evolving from green to red (usually selected for the study of redness)
and b* from blue to yellow (study of pigmentation).
The skin radiance can therefore be described by a*, which corresponds to the redness and
L*, which defines the luminosity. However, additional information can be extracted, in order
to qualify the skin color heterogeneity [color difference metric DeltaE (21)] and vividness
[chroma = ([a*]2 þ [b*]2)1/2) (19)], which are key factors in the problematics of dull complexion.
To conclude, videocapillaroscopy and colorimeters assess color hue, saturation, and
heterogeneity directly or indirectly. They can be usefully combined with standardized
photography, which allows to illustrate and even quantify these factors.
Photography
Once calibrated and standardized, photography offers many applications to study skin
radiance/complexion. It appears more appropriate to study texture heterogeneity than
glowing aspect because of the influence of the light. The image can be easily disturbed by
brightness induced by the flashlight or by the environment. The nature as well as the
positioning of the light source and the posture of the subject are of major importance and must
be taken into consideration to avoid visual artifacts (Fig. 3).
Polarized light photography provides more information than usual in terms of
heterogeneity of structure. Its principle consists in differentiating the regular reflectance
(glare) from the light “back-scattered” (complexion) from within the skin. The regular
reflectance contains information related to the surface relief/shininess and the other one to the
color. A filter is placed in front of the camera and another one in front of the flashlight. When
the orientation of the filters is perpendicular (cross polarization), the regular reflectance is
blocked and only the back-scattered light from the tissues reaches the lens [revealing the
complexion (skin redness or paleness, color, heterogeneity, etc.)] (Fig. 4), whereas when they
are parallel (parallel polarization), only the reflected polarized light passes through the lens
filter, and details of the surface are enhanced (wrinkles, shininess, scaling) (12,21–23).
Assessment of Skin Relief
Radiant skin is usually considered as smooth, homogeneous, without imperfections. Although
innate, the microtopography of the skin is affected by the environment as well as aging, and
undergoes changes in quantity, depth, and direction (24,25).
Figure 3
Photography taken in an integration sphere, with a homo-
genous and symmetrical light.
Skin Radiance Measurement
409

=== Page 427 ===
Profilometry (mechanical, transparency, or optical), initially developed for micro-
technics, has been applied for many years to study the skin relief (26–29). From 2000, devices
using fringe projections specifically dedicated to the skin have been created (DermaTop,
Eotech, France and Primos, GFM, Germany). Interestingly, this in vivo technique allows to
study the skin imperfections via the assessment of the volume and depth of the wrinkles and in
particular the roughness and heterogeneity of the microrelief (dilated pores, comedones, fine
wrinkles, etc.) (Fig. 5).
Figure 4
Simplified schema of the principle of polarized light photography. (A) With cross-polarization, only the
back-scattered light reached the lens [revealing the complexion (photograph B)]. (C) With parallel polarization,
only the reflected polarized lights pass [revealing the shininess and relief of the skin (photograph D)].
Figure 5
3-D reconstructions obtained
(A) from the cheek (20  20 mm area),
allowing to detect dilated pores, or (B)
from hemi-face (60  80 mm area),
allowing to quantify the roughness/heter-
ogeneity of its relief.
410
Petitjean et al.

=== Page 428 ===
Assessment of the Skin Ability to Reflect the Light
The relief of the skin produces different image contrasts depending on the brightness level of
the surface (the same relief appears more easily in the case of a bright surface). When the skin
surface is irregular, it absorbs light with difficulty and reflects it in many directions. This is
particularly typical of dry and scaly skin. The assessment of the specular component provides
direct information on the glare of the skin. Sandoz et al. have underlined the influence of the
surface bidirectional reflection distribution function (BRDF) measurements for the visibility of
the skin surface (30,31). The light intensity directed toward the observer’s eye is proportional
to the coefficient of reflection of the surface. The behavior of bright and matt surfaces is
different since the BRDF is different for the direction of observation (Fig. 6).
From this principle, a specific device has been developed in Besanc¸on (31,32). Its aim is to
assess the quantity of light reflected that depends on the brightness (Fig. 7). It consists of a
system, which illuminates an area with white light through an objective at one end of an optic
fiber. The beam is directed to the subject at a 258 angle. The light reflected is measured by
inputting a profile of intensity of light for various angles values. It is generally admitted that
radiant skin tends to act as a mirror, i.e., to reflect rays in a specular manner (with the same
258 angle) and dull skin tends to diffuse light more. This instrument has shown its good
sensitivity and specificity to characterize the dull to glowing radiance of the skin (32). This
technique allows to access to the breadth of the gaussian curve, defining the diffusion of light
rays, as well as its maximal intensity, defining the skin brightness (reflection).
Figure 6
Simplified schema of the visibility of the skin relief: the contrast is given by the amount of light reflected
in the direction of the observer. The perception of a wrinkle will be modified by the quality of the skin surface. If the
skin is bright (A), the wrinkle will be more contrasted and more visible. If the surface is matt (B) it will be more
blurred.
, wider reflection cone
, specular component of the light
intensity of the light perceived =
simulation of the contrast of the skin perceived by the observer.
Skin Radiance Measurement
411

=== Page 429 ===
Gillon et al. have also developed a specific contactless device (brillanometry) (33). Its
principle consists in directing a polarized light beam perpendicularly to the skin surface and to
assess the reflected beam in the same direction.
The application of systems of polarization of the light currently used in photographs has
given the opportunity to Bossa Nova Technologies to develop a system called SAMBA1 a few years
ago. It evaluates the gloss by assessing the scattering properties of the skin or the hair (34).
Finally, no instrument can quantify today the skin radiance globally, but there are
devices that allow to assess its different components.
With contrast to the color, the glow remains difficult to quantify. The development of
simulation systems would perhaps be one solution (35). Many terms are usually employed
to characterize the skin radiance: shininess, brightness, glow, glare, gloss, etc. Shininess,
brightness, and gloss refer to the reflection of light to something, and are more frequently used
to characterize seborrheic skin or to assess the effect of make-up on lips. Glare seems to evoke a
shine with a dazzling light, whereas the glow associates an intense color with a slight shine.
The glowing aspect of the skin has, thus, to be differentiated from its brightness, which is the
characteristic of greasy skin and is unaesthetic. If gloss is what women expect for their hair
(34), glow is a better representation of radiant skin. All these notions show a real need to define
the skin radiance more accurately.
Clinical Scoring
In 2006, Baret et al. organized a round table meeting with women (23). As a result of these
exchanges, many items (including the skin grain, brightness, and color) were selected and
studied in volunteers of different age groups from image analysis of video data of their face.
Experts performed clinical scoring and then divided the volunteers in two groups: the young
one, whose radiance was considered more dependent on skin luminosity and color (rosy color)
and the old one, who was mainly characterized by irregular skin surface aspects and color
variations.
These definitions corroborate the idea that radiance is multifactorial and naturally
include an important subjective part.
As previously mentioned for photography, it is of great importance to perform the
scoring in controlled conditions. The subjects have to be seated between “daylight” lamps and
to wear white clothes as well as a white paper cap to avoid any influence from extrinsic colors,
and to stay at rest in a temperature-controlled room (36).
In 2004, Musnier et al. organized a brainstorming session with several beauticians to
develop a model of sensory evaluation of the skin radiance (36). One hundred volunteers were
also interviewed to self-appraise their complexion. The synthesis of the data allowed to
determine four skin-coloring descriptors and to construct a model “C.L.B.T.,” on the basis of
the visual perception of skin color (C), luminosity (L), brightness (B), and transparency (T).
Figure 7
Principle of the instrument developed for BRDF measurement on the skin. Photodetectors distributed in
the place of incidence sample the angular distribution of the reflected light. BRDF of a matt surface distributes the
reflected light in a wider cone of diffusion (dull complexion). A bright surface concentrates the reflected light in a
narrow cone of reflection (glowing complexion).
412
Petitjean et al.

=== Page 430 ===
CONCLUSION
Facing the increasing importance of appearance, consumers wish to reflect the image of their
inner well-being represented mainly by a beautiful skin and healthy looks (34). The cosmetic
industry has perfectly understood this concept and developed specific products designed to
enhance the complexion, illuminate the skin, or fight off the detrimental effects of the
pollution.
Several options are available to improve dull complexion. Most of the products currently
on the market claim an action on the skin texture. They act either by optical effects with the
help of pigments, or by a vitamin contribution to the antioxidant properties, or with exfoliating
active principles that attenuate the imperfections, smooth the skin, making the complexion
more glowing. Others claim an action on the microcirculation. The products often associate
several of these effects.
All these data confirm that the assessment of skin radiance implies the study of the
geometry of the light reflection as well as the interaction between the light (interaction with
surface/glow) and the color (interaction within the skin/complexion). However, the skin relief
seems to be therefore one of the key factors of the skin radiance (1).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Perrine Mermet, Elisabeth Homassel, Isabelle Bruey, Ce´cile Tarrit,
and Sophie Vacheron for their contribution to this article.
REFERENCES
1. Petitjean A. Approches biome´trologiques de l’e´clat du teint. Th: Sci. Vie Sante´: Besanc¸on 2006:25/06/05.
2. Purdue GF, Hunt JL. Cold Injury: a collective review. J Burn Care Rehab 1986; 7(4):331–342.
3. Middleton JD. The mechanism of water binding in stratum corneum. Br J Dermatol 1968; 80:437–450.
4. Monfrecola G, Riccio G, Savarese C, et al. The acute effect of smoking on cutaneous microcirculation
blood flow in habitual smokers and nonsmokers. Dermatology 1998; 197(2):115–118.
5. Koh JS, Kang H, Choi SW, et al. Cigarette smoking associated with premature facial wrinkling: image
analysis of facial skin replicas. Int J Dermatol 2002; 41(1):21–27.
6. Besne´ I, Clot JP, Misery L, et al. Stress et dermatologie. In: Thurin JM, Baumann N. Stress, pathologies
et immunite´. Chap. 18. Paris: Me´decine-Sciences Flammarion, 2003:192–199.
7. Takiwaki H, Kanno Y, Miyaoka Y, et al. Computer simulation of skin color based on a multilayered
skin model. Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:36–41.
8. Anderson RR, Parrish JA. The optics of human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 77:13–19.
9. Sainthillier JM, Creidi P, Degouy A, et al. Topical application of a manganese gluconate preparation
inhibits the effects of neosynephrin on the cutaneous microcirculation (Poster). 20th World Congress
of Dermatology; Paris; 1–5 July 2002.
10. Altemus M, Rao B, Dhabbar FS, et al. Stress-induced changes in skin barrier function in healthy
women. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 117:309–317.
11. Petitjean A, Mac-mary S, Sainthillier JM, et al. Effects of cigarette smoking on the skin of women.
J Dermatol Sci 2006; 42:259–261.
12. Raitio A, Kontinen J, Rasi M, et al. Comparison of clinical and computerized image analyses in the
assessment of skin ageing in smokers and nonsmokers. Acta Derm Venereol 2004; 84:422–427.
13. Li L, Mac-Mary S, Sainthillier JM, et al. Age-related changes of the cutaneous microcirculation in vivo.
Gerontology 2006; 52:142–153.
14. Humbert P, Sainthillier JM, Mac-Mary S, et al. Capillaroscopy and videocapillaroscopy assessment of
skin microcirculation: dermatological and cosmetic approaches. J Cosmet Dermatol 2005; 4:153–162.
15. Sainthillier JM, Gharbi T, Muret P, et al. Skin capillary network recognition and analysis by means of
neural algorithms. Skin Res Technol 2005; 11(1):9–16.
16. Taylor S, Westerhof W, Im S, et al. Noninvasive techniques for the evaluation of skin color. J Am Acad
Dermatol 2006; 54: S282–S290.
17. Agache P. Skin color measurement. In: Agache P, Humbert P, eds. Measuring the Skin: Noninvasive
Investigations, Physiology, Normal Constants. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 2004:33–39.
18. Agache P. Assessment of erythema and pallor. In: Agache P, Humbert P, eds. Measuring the Skin:
Noninvasive Investigations, Physiology, Normal Constants. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 2004:40–59.
Skin Radiance Measurement
413

=== Page 431 ===
19. Precise color communication: color control from perception to instrumentation. Konica Minolta
Sensing, 1998, Japan.
20. Robertson AR. Historical development of CIE recommended color difference equations. Color Res
Appl 1990; 3:167–170.
21. Haeghen YV, Naeyaert JMAD, Lemahieu I, et al. An imaging system with calibrated color image
acquisition for use in dermatology. Med. Imaging, IEEE Trans. 2000; 19(7):722–730.
22. Tanaka H, Nakagami G, Sanada H, et al. Quantitative evaluation of elderly skin based on digital
image analysis. Skin Res Technol 2008; 14(2):192–200.
23. Baret M, Bensimon N, Coronel S, et al. Characterization and quantification of the skin radiance
through new digital image analysis. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12:254–260.
24. Pierard GE, Uhoda I, Pierard-Franchimont C. From microrelief to wrinkles: an area ripe for
investigation. J Cosmet Dermatol 2004; 2:21–28.
25. Li L, Mac-Mary S, Marsaut D, et al. Age-related changes in skin topography and microcirculation.
Arch Dermatol Res 2006; 297:412–416.
26. Lagarde JM, Rouvrais C, Black D, et al. Skin topography measurement by interference fringe
projection: a technical validation. Skin Res Technol 2001; 7:112–121.
27. Nardin P, Nita D, Mignot J. Automation of a series of cutaneous topography measurements from
silicon rubber replicas. Skin Res Technol 2002; 8:112–117.
28. Lee HK, Seo YK, Baek JH, et al. Comparison between ultrasonography (Dermascan C version 3) and
transparency profilometry (Skin Visiometer SV600). Skin Res Technol 2008; 14:8–12.
29. Makki S, Barbenel JC, Agache P. A quantitative method for the assessment of the microtopography of
human skin. Acta Derm Venereol 1979; 59:285–291.
30. Sandoz P, Marsaut D, Armbruster V, et al. Toward objective evaluation of the skin aspect: principles
and instrumentation. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:263–270.
31. Nayar SK, Oren M. Visual appearance of matte surfaces. Science 1995; 267:1153–1156.
32. Petitjean A, Sainthillier JM, Mac-Mary S, et al. Validation of technique measuring skin radiance. Skin
Res Technol 2007; 13:2–8.
33. Gillon V, Perie G, Schnebert S, et al. A new method for contactless in vivo quantitative measurement
of stratum corneum gloss attributes: influence of natural active ingredients. In: Marks R, Le´veˆque JL,
Voegeli R, eds. The Essential Stratum Corneum. London: Martin Dunitz, 2002:331–334.
34. McMullen R, Jachowicz J. Optical properties of hair: effect of treatments on luster as quantified by
image analysis. J Cosmet Sci 2003; 54:335–351.
35. Minami K, Kaneko T, Suzamwa T, et al. Changes in facial impressions by controlling the color of
surface reflection from cosmetic foundations: appearance evaluation and formulation technique.
IFSCC 2007; 10:111–117.
36. Musnier C, Piquemal P, Beau P, et al. Visual evaluation in vivo of complexion radiance using the
CLBT sensory methodology. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:50–56.
37. Fink B, Neave N. The biology of facial beauty. Int J Cosm Sci 2005; 27:317–325.
414
Petitjean et al.

=== Page 432 ===
39
Tribological Studies on Skin: Measurement
of the Coefficient of Friction
Raja K. Sivamani, Gabriel Wu, and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Norm V. Gitis
Center for Tribology, Inc., Campbell, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Because the skin is a surface, it is convenient to analyze and describe it in terms of its surface
characteristics such as friction. Tribological studies of skin provide valuable insight into how
the skin interacts with other surfaces and how it can change under various conditions, like age
and health, and chemical treatments, such as lotions and moisturizers (1). Because the skin is
the first-line of defense against the environment, it is repeatedly subjected to physical and
chemical damage and alterations. For example, Naylor (2) showed that the moistened skin has
an elevated friction response, and El-Shimi (3) demonstrated that the drier skin has a lowered
friction response. Tribological studies offer convenient, noninvasive techniques to quantita-
tively assess skin health and hydration.
The tribological parameter generally measured is the coefficient of friction by bringing a
surface into contact with the skin and moving it relative to the surface. When the two surfaces are
brought in contact, the perpendicular force is defined as the normal force (N). The friction force (Ff)
is the force that opposes the relative movement between the two surfaces. According to Amontons’
law, the coefficient of friction (m) is defined as the ratio of the friction force to the normal force:
 ¼ Ff
N
Friction can be described in two different manners: the static friction coefficient (ms) and
the dynamic or kinetic friction coefficient (mk). The static friction coefficient refers to the
friction that builds up just before the initiation of relative movement; the dynamic or
kinetic friction coefficient refers to the friction that exists as the two surfaces are moving
relative to each other. Although most of the skin research has focused on the dynamic
friction coefficients, with the two surfaces moving at a relative constant velocity, some
work has focused on static friction coefficients.
According to Amontons’ law, the dynamic friction coefficient remains unchanged regardless
of the probe velocity or the applied normal load in making the measurement. Amontons’ laws hold
true for dry sliding contacts between solid bodies with limited elastic properties. Although Naylor
(2) concluded that Amontons’ law is true for skin, later studies (3–6) determined that skin deviates
from Amontons’ law. El-Shimi (3) and Comaish and Bottoms (4) reasoned that the increase in
friction coefficient resulted from the viscoelastic nature of the skin allowing for a nonlinear
deformation of the skin with reduced normal loads. Also, with the presence of liquids, as is the case
for the surface of human skin, the friction coefficient can change with velocity too, because the
contact moves into an elastohydrodynamic lubrication regimen.
Various experimental designs have been devised to measure the friction on skin. They
focus on measuring friction by pressing a probe onto the skin with a known normal force, and
then detecting the skin’s frictional resistance to movement of the probe. The designs fall into
two categories (Table 1):
1.
A probe moved across the skin in a linear fashion.
2.
A rotating probe in contact with the skin surface.
Adapted from Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers Part J. J Eng Tribol, 2006; 220(J8): 729–737.

=== Page 433 ===
Table 1
Probes and Apparatus used to Measure the Dynamic or Static (When Noted) Friction Coefficient (m) of Skin In Vivo
Author
Probe size and shape
Probe material
Motion of test apparatus
Maintenance of normal load
Naylor (2)
8 mm diameter sphere
Polyethylene
Linear, reciprocating
Static weights
El-Shimi (3)
12 mm diameter hemisphere
Stainless steel (rough),
stainless steel (smooth)
Rotational
Static weights
Comaish and Bottoms (4)
15 mm diameter annular ring
Teflon, nylon, polyethylene, wool
Linear
Static weights
Koudine et al. (5)
Hemisphere lens
Glass
Linear
Static weights; balance beam
Highley et al. (7)
Disc
Nylon
Rotational
Spring load
Prall (8)
Disc
Glass
Rotational
Spring load
Cua et al. (9)
15 mm diameter disc
Teflon
Rotational
Spring load
Johnson et al. (10)
8 mm (radius of curvature) lens
Glass
Linear, reciprocating
Static weights
Asserin et al. (11)
3 mm diameter sphere
Ruby
Linear
Balloon; static weights
Elsner et al. (12)
15 mm diameter disc
Teflon
Rotational
Spring load
Sivamani et al. (6)
10 mm diameter sphere
Stainless steel
Linear
Computer controlled
Sivamani et al. (13)
13 mm diameter cylinder
Copper
Linear
Computer controlled
Egawa et al. (14)
100 mm2 square
Piano wire
Linear
Computer controlled
Zhang and Mak (15)
Annular ring
Teflon
Rotational
Spring balance
Li et al. (16)
125  145 mm planar surface
Sandstone, slate, granite
Linear
Supplied by the participant
O’Meara and Smith (17) and
O’Meara and Smith (18)
Cylindrical “grabrail”
Chrome, stainless steel,
powder-coated steel,
textured aluminum, knurled steel
Linear
Supplied by the participant
Source: From Ref. 1.
416
Sivamani et al.

=== Page 434 ===
In the linear designs, the probe movement is accomplished in several ways. Comaish and
Bottoms (4) utilized one of the simplest linear designs: They moved the probe across the skin
by attaching it to a pan of weights by means of a pulley. More sophisticated linear designs
followed the simple design used by Comaish and Bottoms (4) but provided motorized
unidirectional movement of the probe or the use of a reciprocating motor to move the probe
back and forth. In both designs, the motorization affords greater control in maintaining the
velocity of the probe and the normal load applied to the skin. Strain gauges measure the friction
force as the probe moves along the skin surface.
The second design category measures friction with a rotating wheel pressed onto the
surface of the skin with a known normal force. Highley et al. (7) measured the frictional
resistance by determining the angular recoil of the instrument as the wheel contacted the skin.
Comaish et al. (19) developed a portable, hand held device (Newcastle Friction Meter1) that
relied on a torsion spring to measure the skin’s frictional resistance.
An important part of designing a friction measurement apparatus is choosing the probe
size, shape, and material. Because friction is an interaction between two surfaces, the probe
geometry and material will affect the values calculated for the friction coefficient of the other
surface. Several shapes and material have been used as outlined in Table 1. Also, results will be
more accurate when the probe’s normal force is maintained at a constant value or continuously
monitored; different methods have been used to maintain the normal force including spring
mechanisms, static weights, or computer-controlled feedback (Table 1). Probe parameters are
revisited critically later.
Previously measured values for the fiction coefficient are outlined in Table 2. Special
mention should be made for friction measurements of the fingers, palms, and soles because
these parts of the body are more often in contact with another surface. It may be more relevant
to measure static friction coefficients at these sites, since common activities such as gripping
handrails, gripping car steering wheels, or holding a cup involve the static friction coefficient
more than the dynamic friction coefficient. Some authors have studied the dynamic friction
coefficient of the palm (9,15), and other authors have studied the static friction coefficient of the
palms and fingers (16–18). Increased sweating in the hands and feet (4) and increased
roughness, because of the presence of epidermal ridges (15), may contribute to increased
friction coefficients.
FACTORS
Normal Load
The control of the load is important because the friction coefficient does not adhere to
Amontons’ law. Wolfram provided a theoretical analysis where he shows that the dynamic
friction of the skin should relate to the normal load as:
 / Nð1=3Þ
where N is the applied load normal to the skin. Koudine et al. (5) found this dependence
to hold experimentally:
 / N0:28
and this was confirmed by the analysis of Sivamani et al. (6):
 / N0:32
Hydration
Hydration is a multifaceted phenomenon influenced by intrinsic (i.e., age, anatomical site) and
extrinsic (i.e., ambient humidity, chemical exposure) factors. Hydration studies have correlated
increases and decreases in skin hydration with the changes in the friction coefficient. These
studies reveal that drier skin has lowered friction while hydrated skin has an increased amount
of friction (2–4,6–8,10,13,20–23). However, the skin response is more complex, because very wet
skin also has a lowered friction coefficient much like the characteristics of dry skin (24). Most
studies focus on an intermediate zone of hydration where the skin has been moistened without
Tribological Studies on Skin
417

=== Page 435 ===
an appreciable “slippery” layer of water on the skin. Studies investigating the hydration-
induced increases in friction were varied and this possibly results from the various probes
used. Although the addition of water increases the friction coefficient, this effect lasts only for
minutes before the skin returns to its “normal” state (3,6,7,23). The water softens the skin and
this in turn allows for greater contact area between the probe and the skin. Also, water results
in adhesive forces between the water and the probe. Thus, there is more frictional resistance
between the skin and the probe and results in a higher friction coefficient (20). Since the water
evaporates in minutes, the skin returns to its normal state in the same time frame. For dry skin,
the skin becomes less supple and the probe does not achieve as much contact area, and this
allows the probe to move more easily across the skin surface. Sivamani et al. (6) showed that
administering isopropyl alcohol, a dehydrating chemical, lowered the friction coefficient, and a
lowered friction coefficient was also found in studies involving subjects with clinically dry skin
(3,22). The agreement between the experimentally induced dry skin and clinical dry skin is
expected (25).
Electrical changes in the skin have also been utilized to measure hydration. Although
discussions here will focus on skin friction, a review of electrical measurements is available
from Gitis and Sivamani (26). Briefly, electrical changes in the skin have been used to measure
skin hydration. Skin with more hydration is more permissive of electrical flow and has a
Table 2
Reported Values of the Dynamic Friction Coefficient (m) for Untreated “Normal” Skin In Vivo
Author
m
Naylor (2)
0.5–0.6
El-Shimi (3)
0.2–0.4 (stainless steel, rough)
0.3–0.6 (stainless steel, smooth)
Comaish and Bottoms (4)
0.2 (Teflon)
0.45 (nylon)
0.3 (polyethylene)
0.4 (wool)
Koudine et al. (5)
0.24 (dorsal forearm)
0.64 (ventral forearm)
Highley et al. (7)
0.2–0.3
Prall (8)
0.4
Cua et al. (9)
0.34 (forehead)
0.26 (ventral forearm)
0.21 (palm)
0.12 (abdomen)
0.25 (upper back)
Johnson et al. (10)
0.3–0.4
Asserin et al. (11)
0.7
Elsner et al. (12)
0.48 (forearm)
0.66 (vulva)
Sivamani et al. (6)
0.33–0.55
Sivamani et al. (13)
0.45–0.65 (untreated)
0.81–1.17 (occlusion)
1.19–1.71 (petrolatum)
1.25–1.81 (glycerin)
Egawa et al. (14)
0.2–0.3
Zhang and Mak (15)
0.40–0.62 (anatomical site)
0.37–0.61 (probe material)
Li et al. (16)
2.48–3.25 (rock types)
3.00 (no chalk on hands)
2.47 (chalk on hands)
O’Meara and Smith (17)
0.78–1.39 (dry palm-no grip)
0.90–1.09 (wet palm-no grip)
0.14–0.34 (soapy palm-no grip)
O’Meara and Smith (18)
1.44–1.91 (dry palm-active grip)
1.10–1.92 (wet palm-active grip)
0.34–0.64 (soapy palm-active grip)
Authors that studied the static coefficient of friction have been noted in the Table 2, and their data for certain
treatments conditions have been included.
Source: From Ref. 1.
418
Sivamani et al.

=== Page 436 ===
lowered resistance when compared with dry skin. Decreases in hydration have been detected
with electrical measurement in clinical conditions that have a loss of hydration, like psoriasis
(27) or atopic dermatitis (22).
Anatomic Region, Age, Gender, and Race
So far no significant differences have been found with regard to gender (9,13,21) or race (13,28).
Age-related studies have been debatable and may depend on the anatomical site that is used
for comparisons.
The friction coefficient varies with anatomical site. Cua et al. (9,21) found that friction
coefficients varied from 0.12 on the abdomen to 0.34 on the forehead. They attributed this
difference in the friction coefficient to differing hydration, nonapparent sweating, and sebum
secretions in skin of different areas of the body. Zhang and Mak (15) found friction
coefficients to differ from 0.40 on the leg to 0.62 on the palm. They too suggested that
variation in hydration may be accountable for the differences among anatomical sites. Elsner
et al. (12) measured the vulvar friction coefficient at 0.66, whereas the forearm friction
coefficient was 0.48. Manuskiatti et al. (28) studied skin roughness and found significant
differences in skin roughness at various anatomical sites. Differences in environmental
influences (i.e., sun exposure) and hydration may account for this. Elsner et al. (12) showed
that the more-hydrated vulvar skin had a 35% higher friction coefficient than the forearm,
and this is in agreement with the hydration studies that contend that skin has an increased
friction coefficient under increased hydration. Sivamani et al. (13) found the friction
coefficient to differ along the volar forearm with the proximal forearm to be more hydrated
and therefore have a higher friction coefficient than the distal forearm. Normally, the
proximal volar forearm tends to be covered by the arm when the elbow is flexed and this can
lead to less water loss and increased hydration than the distal volar forearm. However, when
using an amplitude/mean measurement that serves to normalize the friction coefficient
against the volar forearm “stickiness” or stick-slip friction, Sivamani et al. (13) found no
differences along the volar forearm (Fig. 1). In other words, the amplitude/mean represents
the ratio of the difference between the static and dynamic coefficients of friction to the
dynamic coefficient of friction:
Amplitude
Mean
¼ static  dynamic
dynamic
¼ static
dynamic
 1
With respect to age, increased sunlight exposure can increase collagen cross-linking and
therefore alter the friction properties of skin. Although studies have been conflicting,
Figure 1
Calculation of the amplitude/mean measurement. The mean refers to the mean value of the measured
friction coefficient as indicated on the graph. The amplitude refers to the deviation from the mean seen during the
friction coefficient measurement as indicated on the graph, and is measure of the stick-slip friction along the
surface. Then, the amplitude is divided by the mean to calculate the amplitude/mean. This is a measure of
the skin’s “stickiness.” Source: From Ref. 13.
Tribological Studies on Skin
419

=== Page 437 ===
recent studies have shown that the skin does not undergo age-related friction changes in
areas protected from sun exposure. Cua et al. (21) found no significant age-related changes
at various parts of the body, including areas that were exposed to the sun. Elsner et al. (12)
conducted age-related tests and found no differences in the vulvar friction coefficient, but
found a higher volar forearm friction coefficient in younger subjects. They postulate that the
skin on parts of the body that become exposed to sunlight can undergo photoaging, and
thus, volar forearm skin shows evidence of age-related differences, while the light-
protected vulvar skin does not (12). However, Sivamani et al. (13) and Egawa et al. (14)
found that the volar forearm did not change with age. This may be a reflection of variation
in sun exposure among study populations.
Gender and ethnicity-related friction studies have shown no differences in the friction
coefficient. Cua et al. (9,21) and Sivamani et al. (13) found no significant friction differences
between the genders. Manuskiatti et al. (28) found no differences in roughness and scaliness
between black and white skin; and Sivamani et al. (13) found no differences in the friction
coefficient or electrical impedance among subjects of Caucasian, African-American, Asian, or
Hispanic/Latino descent (Fig. 2) or in their responses to treatments (Figs. 3 and 4).
Lubricants/Emollients/Moisturizers
Much research has been devoted in determining how the application of certain ingredients
influences the skin surface to appear and feel healthy, which is of interest to the cosmetic/
moisturizer and lubricant industries. The studies focused on the effects of powder (3,4,16), oils
(3,4,7,23), and skin creams/moisturizers (9,23). Hills et al. (29) analyzed how changes in the
friction coefficient, following emollient application, differed with temperature.
Important qualitative characteristics in skin topical agents include skin smoothness,
greasiness, and moisturization (20,30). Previous reports have described these subjective,
qualitative descriptions in a quantitative fashion by correlating them against parameters
considering the friction of the skin. Nacht et al. (23) found a linear correlation between
perceived greasiness and the friction coefficient (Fig. 5). Prall (8) found a quantitative
correlation for skin smoothness by taking into account the friction coefficient, skin topography,
and hardness into the analysis. Sivamani et al. (13) found that an amplitude/mean
measurement (Fig. 1) could be used as a marker of greasiness between different hydrative
agents. When this marker is used in conjunction with electrical impedance, the quantitative
effects occlusive versus directly hydrating agents could be differentiated. Occlusive agents,
such as petrolatum, lowered amplitude/mean measurements and increased the electrical
impedance. Directly hydrating agents, such as water or glycerin, increased amplitude/mean
and increased the electrical impedance (13), and these effects are shown in Figures 3, 4, and 6.
These two parameters may prove useful in studying and comparing lubricants, emollients, and
moisturizers against one another.
Figure 2
Coefficient of friction and electrical impedance across ethnicity. No significant differences were found
among the ethnic groups. Error bars represent standard error.
420
Sivamani et al.

=== Page 438 ===
Powder
El-Shimi (3) and Comaish and Bottoms (4) showed that the friction coefficient decreased after
the application of powder. El-Shimi (3) found the friction coefficient to decrease by 50% after
application; Comaish and Bottoms (4), in analyzing the static friction coefficient, observed an
insignificant change for a wool probe and a 30% decrease in friction with a polyethylene probe.
However, they also found that wetting the talc powder caused an increase in the measured
friction.
Li et al. (16) also studied the effect of magnesium carbonate, or “chalk,” in the static
friction coefficient regimen and found that the application of chalk decreased the static friction
coefficient. This contradicts with the popular use of chalk to increase friction in rock climbing.
Li et al. (16) suggested that the chalk can be useful in drying the climber’s hands before the
climb, but suggested that all traces of the chalk be removed before the actual climb.
Figure 4
Change in electrical impedance across ethnicity. Data represent decreases in electrical impedance
when compared with untreated skin of the volar forearm. No significant differences were found between the
different ethnic groups. Glycerin lowered the electrical impedance significantly more than PVDC occlusion or
petrolatum (p < 0.01). The decrease in the electrical impedance was due to PVDC occlusion and was not
significantly different from the effect of petrolatum. Error bars represent standard error. Source: From Ref. 13.
Figure 3
Coefficient of friction across ethnicity. Data represent increases in friction when compared with
untreated skin of the volar forearm. No significant differences were found between the different ethnic groups.
Petrolatum and glycerin increased the friction coefficient significantly more than polyvinylidene cholride (PVDC)
plastic occlusion (p < 0.01). The increase in the friction coefficient was due to petrolatum and was not significantly
different from the effect of glycerin. Error bars represent standard error. Source: From Ref. 13.
Tribological Studies on Skin
421

=== Page 439 ===
Lubricant Oils
Initially the friction coefficient decreases after the application of oils and oil-based lubricants
(3,7,23). Nacht et al. (23) and Highley et al. (7) also showed that after the initial decrease in
friction, the oils eventually elevate the skin’s friction coefficient (Fig. 7).
Emollients and Moisturizers
Prall (8) and Nacht et al. (23) found that the friction coefficient rises with the addition of
emollients and creams in a similar fashion to water. However, the effects of the creams lasted
for hours while the water effects lasted for about 5 to 20 minutes (6,8,23). Hills et al. (29) also
studied emollients, but they examined how different emollients compared against one another
and how changes in temperature changed the friction coefficient. At a higher temperature
(458C), most emollients lowered the friction coefficient to a greater degree than at a lower
temperature (188C).
Figure 6
Amplitude/mean measurements for interventions. The application of glycerin and the PVDC occlusion
increased the amplitude/mean of the volar forearm, and glycerin raised the amplitude/mean significantly more than
PVDC occlusion (p < 0.001). Petrolatum significantly decreased the amplitude/mean, and this is quantitative
evidence of petrolatum’s greasiness (p < 0.001 when comparing petrolatum against glycerin or occlusion). Error
bars represent standard error. Source: From Ref. 13.
Figure 5
Correlation between changes in the friction coefficient and the sensory perception of greasiness. A, B,
C, D, E, and F represent different creams that were applied to the skin. The reported percentage change in the
friction coefficient is immediately after application, and the greasiness scores were subjective evaluations. Source:
From Ref. 16.
422
Sivamani et al.

=== Page 440 ===
When lubricant/moisturizers are applied to the skin, the skin friction is affected in three
general ways (20,23).
1.
A large, immediate increase in the friction coefficient, similar to water application
that follows with a slow decrease in the friction coefficient. These agents act by
immediately hydrating the skin through some aqueous means to give an immediate
increase in friction. In Figure 5, this is seen in creams A, B, and C.
2.
An initial decrease in the friction coefficient that is followed by an overall increase in
the friction coefficient. These agents are fairly greasy products (Fig. 7), and this
greasiness causes the immediate decrease in the friction coefficient. The eventual rise
in the friction coefficient is probably because of an occlusive effect that prevents
water loss from the skin, thereby increasing the hydration of the skin. Representa-
tions of a few ingredients that elicit this response are in Figure 7 and in Figure 5 as
cream F.
3.
A small, immediate increase in the friction coefficient then continues to increase
slowly. These agents act through a combination of mechanisms seen in the previous
two cases. These lubricants/moisturizers have ingredients and agents that both
hydrate through aqueous mechanisms and prevent water loss through occlusive
mechanisms. Because of the presence of the these occlusive agents, which tend to be
more slippery, the immediate rise in the friction coefficient is lower than in products
that fall into the first category listed above. In Figure 5, this is seen in creams D and E.
Soap
O’Meara and Smith (17,18) showed that the application of soapy water to the palmar surfaces
decreased the friction coefficient by 2 to 9-fold from the dry palm static friction coefficients.
They also showed that textured surfaces (e.g., knurled steel) produce higher friction coefficients
against soapy skin than smooth surfaces (e.g., chrome) and suggested that textured materials
may be more appropriate as grabrails in showering areas (18).
Probes
As mentioned earlier, the probe geometry and material influence the measured value of the
friction coefficient because friction is a probe-skin interaction phenomenon. Besides natural
variations in skin, the wide range in results may be due to differences in probe movement,
geometry, controlled monitoring of the normal force, and material chosen to make the friction
measurement. In designing the friction measurement apparatuses, the two types of probe
Figure 7
Effect of lubricant cosmetic ingredient on skin friction coefficient. Amount applied of each material:
approx. 2mg/cm2. Time ¼ 1 is immediately prior to application; time ¼ 0 is immediately after application. Source:
From Ref. 16.
Tribological Studies on Skin
423

=== Page 441 ===
movements utilized were rotational probe movement and linear probe movement (Table 1). As
a result, the linear probe constantly moves over “untested” skin and the rotational probe spins
over “tested” skin, leading to variations in the reported values for the skin friction coefficient.
Few studies have examined probe effects: El-Shimi (3) studied probe roughness, Comaish and
Bottoms (4) studied probe roughness and material, Zhang and Mak (15) studied probe
material, Li et al. (16) studied various rock surfaces under static friction coefficient conditions,
and O’Meara and Smith (17,18) studied static friction coefficient conditions for handrails of
various materials.
El-Shimi (3) and Comaish and Bottoms (4) compared probes (Tables 1 and 2) and found
that smoother probes resulted in higher friction coefficient measurements. El-Shimi (3) noted
that higher friction coefficient measurements were made with a smoother stainless steel probe
as opposed to a roughened stainless steel probe. Comaish and Bottoms (4) found a similar
result with two types of nylon probes: a sheet probe and a knitted probe. The sheet probe (the
smoother of the two) gave a higher friction coefficient measurement. El-Shimi (3) postulated
that the smoother probe formed more contact points with the skin and has a greater skin
contact area than the rougher probe, resulting in more resistance from the skin and a larger
measurement for the friction coefficient. Zhang and Mak (15) postulated that friction depends
on the contribution of two actions: the “ploughing” action and the force required to overcome
adhesion. Of the five probes they tested, silicone probes resulted in the highest friction
measurement. They proposed that comparable probes that have higher contribution from the
adhesion force, such as silicone, will have higher friction coefficients. Li et al. (16) found that
sandstone produced a larger static friction coefficient than granite and slate. O’Meara and
Smith (17) found in their testing of grabrail materials that smoother surfaces, like chrome or
powder-coated steel, produced higher friction coefficients for dry or watery (nonsoapy) palm
skin, whereas textured surfaces, like knurled steel or textured aluminum, produced higher
friction coefficients against soapy palm skin.
CONCLUSION
The reviewed studies show that differences in skin, because of various factors like age and
hydration, can be correlated with the friction coefficient. It can serve as a quantitative measure
of how skin differs on various anatomical sites, between different clinical conditions, and how
it differs under various environmental and chemical interactions. It is also a useful method for
tracking mechanical changes in the skin after the application of chemicals, like skin creams or
irritants and this has important implications as a quantitative measure of the cosmetic quality
of skin. The design of the test apparatus is an important factor in the measurement of
tribological properties, and a better appreciation of the cosmetic understanding of skin will
continue to evolve with further study of skin tribology.
REFERENCES
1. Sivamani RK, Goodman J, Gitis NV, et al. Coefficient of friction: tribological studies in man – an
overview. Skin Res Technol 2003; 9(3):227–234.
2. Naylor PFD. The skin surface and friction. Br J Dermatol 1955; 67:239–248.
3. El-Shimi AF. In vivo skin friction measurements. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:37–51.
4. Comaish S, Bottoms E. The skin and friction: deviations from Amonton’s laws, and the effects of
hydration and lubrication. Br J Dermatol 1971; 84(1):37–43.
5. Koudine AA, Barquins M, Anthoine P, et al. Frictional properties of skin: proposal of a new approach.
Int J Cosmet Sci 2000; 22:11–20.
6. Sivamani RK, Goodman J, Gitis NV, et al. Friction coefficient of skin in real-time. Skin Res Technol
2003; 9(3):235–239.
7. Highley DR, Coomey M, DenBeste M, et al. Frictional properties of skin. J Invest Dermatol 1977;
69:303–305.
8. Prall JK. Instrumental evaluation of the effects of cosmetic products on skin surfaces with particular
reference to smoothness. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1973; 24:693–707.
9. Cua AB, Wilhelm K-P, Maibach HI. Frictional properties of human skin: relation to age, sex and
anatomical region, stratum corneum hydration and transepidermal water loss. Br J Dermatol 1990; 123(4):
473–479.
424
Sivamani et al.

=== Page 442 ===
10. Johnson SA, Gorman DM, Adams MJ, et al. The friction and lubrication of human stratum corneum,
thin films in tribology, eds. Dowson D et al. Proceedings of the 19th Leeds-Lyon Symposium on
Tribology 1993:663–672.
11. Asserin J, Zahouani H, Humbert P, et al. Measurement of the friction coefficient of the human skin in
vivo. Quantification of the cutaneous smoothness. Colloids Surf B: Biointerfaces 2000; 19:1–12.
12. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Frictional properties of human forearm and vulvar skin: influence
of age and correlation with transepidermal water loss and capacitance. Dermatologica 1990; 181(2):88–91.
13. Sivamani RK, Wu GC, Gitis NV, et al. Tribological testing of skin products: gender, age, and ethnicity
on the volar forearm. Skin Res Technol 2003; 9(4):299–305.
14. Egawa M, Oguri M, Hirao T, et al. The evaluation of skin friction using a frictional feel analyzer. Skin
Res Technol 2002; 8(1):41–51.
15. Zhang M, Mak AF. In vivo friction properties of human skin. Prosthet Orthot Int 1999; 23(2):135–141.
16. Li F-X, Margetts S, Fowler I. Use of ‘chalk’ in rock climbing: sine qua non or myth? J Sports Sci 2001;
19(6):427–432.
17. O’Meara DM, Smith RM. Static friction properties between human palmar skin and five grabrail
materials. Ergonomics 2001; 44(11):973–988.
18. O’Meara DM, Smith RM. Functional handgrip test to determine the coefficient of static friction at the
hand/handle interface. Ergonomics 2002; 45(10):717–731.
19. Comaish JS, Harborow PRH, Hofman DA. A hand-held friction meter. Br J Dermatol 1973; 89(1):33–35.
20. Wolfram LJ. Friction of skin. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1983; 34:465–476.
21. Cua AB, Wilhelm K-P, Maibach HI. Skin surface lipid and skin friction: relation to age, sex and
anatomical region. Skin Pharmacol 1995; 8(5):246–251.
22. Loden M, Olsson H, Axell T, et al. Friction, capacitance and transepidermal water loss (TEWL) in dry
atopic and normal skin. Br J Dermatol 1992; 126(2):137–141.
23. Nacht S, Close J-A, Yeung D, et al. Skin friction coefficient: changes induced by skin hydration and
emollient application and correlation with perceived skin feel. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1981; 32:55–65.
24. Dawson D. Tribology of the skin surface. In: Wilhelm K-P, et al. eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Skin
Surface Imaging and Analysis. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1997; 159–179.
25. Denda M. Dry skin and moisturizers: chemistry and function. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2000; 147–153.
26. Gitis NV, Sivamani RK. Tribometrology of skin. Tribol Trans 2004; 47: 461–469.
27. Hashimoto-Kumasaka K, Takahashi K, Tagami H. Electrical measurement of the water content of the
stratum corneum in vivo and in vitro under various conditions: comparison between skin surface
hygrometer and corneometer in evaluation of the skin surface hydration state. Acta Derm Venereol
1993; 73(5):335–339.
28. Manuskiatti W, Schwindt DA, Maibach HI. Influence of age, anatomic site and race on skin roughness
and scaliness. Dermatology 1998; 196(4):401–407.
29. Hills RJ, Unsworth A, Ive FA. A comparative study of the frictional properties of emollient bath
additives using porcine skin. Br J Dermatol 1994; 130:37–41.
30. Wolfram LJ. Cutaneous investigation in health and disease: noninvasive methods and instrumen-
tation. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1989.
Tribological Studies on Skin
425

=== Page 444 ===
40
Skin Wettability and Friction
Ahmed Elkhyat
Department of Dermatology, CHU Saint-Jacques, University of Franche-Comte´, Besanc¸on, France
S. Mac-Mary
Skinexigence SAS, Saint-Jacques University Hospital, Besanc¸on, France
P. Humbert
Research and Studies Center on the Integument (CERT), Saint-Jacques University Hospital, Besanc¸on, France
INTRODUCTION
“. . . Since many of the functional and esthetic qualities of human skin are attributed to the skin
moisture balance. . .” (1).
The skin surface is an ecosystem, stable for a given body region, within which interfacial
tension and friction phenomena play a major role because of the important forces they bring
into action, especially in ruling the physical interactions between hydrophilic and hydrophobic
substances. Examples of these interactions are the sorption of water by stratum corneum and
the spreading of water and lipidic liquids, which influences skin absorption, thermal loss, as
well as transcutaneous pressure of water vapor, carbon dioxide, and oxygen. The production
of a sweat/sebum emulsion as well as the behavior and effect of topical drugs or cosmetics are
also under the influence of these interactions (2).
In this chapter, we first cover the human skin wettability by showing the effects of some
treatments and applications on the wettability parameters. Secondly, the skin friction
coefficient m is studied in function of the surface hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance (Ho/Hi).
HUMAN SKIN WETTABILITY
The wettability—or wetting—results from the interactions between a fluid and a surface in the
presence of vapor or another fluid. The wettability intervenes in many technological processes:
the liquid could be a paint, a dye, an ink, water, etc. The solid could have a regular and simple
surface, but could be more complex (i.e., a fiber, a porous environment, the skin, etc.).
The skin (or solids) wettability by a liquid is the fluid’s aptitude to occupy a large
surface. This is quantifiable by measuring the contact angle (y) formed between these surfaces.
When y ¼ 08, the surface wets completely, while the opposite corresponds to y ¼ 1808
(dewetting), and the partial wetting refers to y ranging between 08 and 1808 (Fig. 1).
Contact Angle Measurement
The equilibrium of a liquid drop placed on a solid surface (Fig. 2) is described by Young
equation (Eq. 1) (3). The general form of this equation for the solid-liquid-air system is as follows:
gLVCos ¼ gSV  gSL  e
ð1Þ
where gLV is the liquid-vapor surface tension, gSV is the solid-vapor energy, and gSL the solid-liquid
energy; pe (external pressure) ¼ 0 for low-energy solids (4).
For the visualization and the measurement of the contact angle, we developed a tool
especially designed for the wettability in vivo (Fig. 3). This tool is based on the use of a mirror
directed at a 458 angle to the skin (profile drop method).
The advancing contact angle of test liquids, i.e., the maximum value of the contact angle
when the drop is inflated without the line of contact moving, is measured on the skin surface.
A drop of test liquid is deposited on the skin surface using a microsyringe and inflated up to a
final drop volume of 5 mL.

=== Page 445 ===
The drop’s image is recorded using a video camera (CDD-Iris, Sony, France) connected to
a computer and mounted on a microscope (Wild Heerbrugg M650, Switzerland), with a
magnification of 16, fitted with a slanted mirror. After visualization and storage of the drop
profile, the contact angle is measured using a program that can determine y from the tangents
of both sides of the drop.
The influence of the roughness and skin temperature on the contact angle is treated in the
literature (5–7). The temperature effect in the liquid in contact with the skin is minimized with
the nature of the deposit (advancing contact angle) and with the very short time of deposit
(15–20 seconds).
Critical Surface Tension (gc) and Hydrophobic/Hydrophilic Balance
Critical Surface Tension
This is the parameter that defines the capacity of a surface to be wet completely or not by a
liquid. Figure 4 shows, according to Zisman’s principle (8), the condition so that a liquid is
spread out completely over a surface (gliquid  gc). gc is expressed according to Eq. 2.
Cos ¼ 1  bðgliquid  gcÞ
ð2Þ
Figure 1
Solid wettability: y ¼ 08: total wetting,
y ¼ 1808: non wetting ¼ dewetting, 0 < y < 180:
partial wetting.
Figure 2
Equilibrium of a liquid drop on a solid surface:
contact angle and surface energy.
Figure 3
Contact angle visualization and measurement:
tool rests on the use of a mirror directed 458 to the skin
“profile drop method.”
428
Elkhyat et al.

=== Page 446 ===
gliquid: liquid surface tension (mJ/m2). Note that the reduction of gc means the increase in the
surface hydrophobia.
Hydrophobic/Hydrophilic Balance
For decades, the surface hydrophobicity has been reported to play an important role in many
biological processes, such as cellular adhesion, contact inhibition, elasticity, functionality of
tissue membranes, functioning of intracellular structures, and adhesion of infectious
microorganisms (9).
To quantify the skin hydrophobia balance (Ho/Hi), we proposed (10) the use of the ratio
gc/gH2O (Eq. 3) to determine a parameter called hydrophilia (Hi). Its counterpart, hydrophobia
Ho (Ho¼1–Hi), characterizes the ability of the skin surface to resist wetting by water.
Hi ¼ gc
gH2O
ð3Þ
This parameter is expressed by the ratio of its critical surface tension gc to the water
surface tension normalized by the latter.
Surface Free Energy (SFE) (gs)
The gs of human skin is a characteristic parameter that determines most of the surface
properties such as adsorption, wetting, adhesion, etc.
The gs of the solids cannot be directly measured because of the very weak mobility of the
molecular atoms. It is necessary to resort to indirect methods such as the study of the
interactions between a solid and a liquid. The gs is derived from measuring the contact angle of
pure liquids with known surface tension parameters.
Several approaches are mentioned in the literature. The two most commonly used
approaches for the skin are described below:
Geometric Mean Approach (11). The gs proportional to the intermolecular energy is the sum
of the dispersion component gs
d and the polar component gs
p.
Acid-Base Approach (12,13). The gs can be expressed as the sum of Lifshitz-van der Waals gs
LW
and acid-base gs
AB components: gs ¼ gs
LW þ gs
AB. The acid-base components can be expressed as:
gs
AB ¼ 2(gs
+ gs
)1/2, the gs
þ and gs
 components indicate, respectively, the electron-acceptor and the
electron-donor components.
Data Analyses
Water Contact Angle (yw)
Water is an important factor for normal skin function. When the water content decreases, the
skin becomes dry and itchy, and it feels uncomfortable. The degree of spreading of a water
drop on the skin surface is an indication of its hydrophobic (Ho) or hydrophilic (Hi) tendency.
Water forms with the skin a semi-hydrophobic contact angle yw (80–918) on the volar
forearm (poor in sebum) (7,14–16). On the forehead (rich in sebum), the skin becomes less
hydrophobic with yw ¼ 578 – 738 (17–19).
Figure 4
Critical surface tension, gc: total
wetting condition (gliquid  gc).
Skin Wettability and Friction
429

=== Page 447 ===
Washing (soap and water) increases significantly the hydrophobicity of the skin on the
forehead (þ308) (19), and degreasing (organic solvent) increases yw on the forearm by þ108
(7,15). It is also noted that atopic skin becomes more hydrophobic with yw (forearm) ¼ 1028 and
that yw (forehead) ¼ 738 increases in dry skin (19). In contrast, the skin (volar forearm) shows a
greater affinity with thermal water (yw ¼ 708) (14).
Figure 5 (17) (cartography) shows that the skin is a hydrophilic surface (yw ¼ 60–858) in
the presence of sebum and a hydrophobic surface in its absence (yw ¼ 91–1028). It was shown
recently (18) that the forehead skin wettability is significantly different (p < 0.05) between black
people (Africans or Caribbeans, yw ¼ 718) and mixed races (African or Caribbean, yw ¼ 678) and
Caucasians (yw ¼ 678).
Critical Surface Tension and Hydrophobic/Hydrophilic Balance
For a liquid to be completely spread out over the skin, it is necessary that its surface tension
(gliquid) is lower or equal to the skin critical surface tension, gc. The absence of sebum on the
volar forearm leads to gc ¼ 26 – 30.6 mJ/m2 (15) (20–24), and its presence on the forehead leads
to a more wettable surface, gc ¼ 33.2 mJ/m2.
The utilization of Eq. 3 shows that the skin on the volar forearm is a more hydrophobic
surface with an Ho ¼ 62% (10), and on the forehead it is a less hydrophobic surface, Ho ¼ 54%.
Washing and degreasing significantly increase the skin hydrophobia, gc varies from 27.5 to
23.7 and 21.6 mJ/m2, respectively, and therefore Ho varies from 62% to 67% and 70%. We
showed that the application of cream (w/o) decreases the skin hydrophobia; the value of gc is
35.5 mJ/m2 (Hi & Ho & 50%) (24).
Surface Free Energy of the Skin
On the volar forearm, gs calculated according to both approaches is approximately 38.5 mJ/m2
(7,10), and on the forehead, gs ranges between 42 and 46 mJ/m2 according to the skin type
Figure 5
Human skin wettability. Effect of sebum on hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance.
430
Elkhyat et al.

=== Page 448 ===
(oily, normal, dry) (19). The use of the acid-bases approach shows that the forehead (sebum-
rich area) has strongly monopolar basic surfaces (gs
 ¼ 26 mJ/m2), and the forearm (sebum-
poor area) has weakly basic surfaces (gs
 ¼ 4 mJ/m2) (19). Washing with soap and water affects gs;
it decreases by –10 m/Jm2 on the volar forearm (10) and by 8 mJ/m2 on the forehead (19).
Degreasing also decreases gs; it varies from 42.5 to 34.5 mJ/m2 on the forehead and from 38.5 to
32.4 mJ/m2 on the volar forearm (7). Table 1 summarizes the previous data.
Discussion
The capacity of the skin surface lipids to increase skin wettability was ascribed to the free fatty
acids and especially to those of sebum. The skin wetting by lipids was found increased with
the amount of squalene and paraffin in sebum (25).
For example, if one lets a water drop (suspended on a hair: Fig. 6A) slide toward a series
of droplets of natural sebum, one notes that these droplets of sebum, by difference in surface
tension (gsebum < gH2O), are rolled from there on water to form a kind of sebum/water
emulsion. This form of emulsion (under certain temperature conditions) leads to the protection
of the aqueous phase against evaporation and transepidermal water loss (TEWL). Conse-
quently, the water in this layer is protected against the evaporation, and therefore the skin is
protected from dehydration. We consider that this layer can play the role of “Garde d’eau”
(water storage). Figure 6B shows the same experience (filmed from another angle): drop of
water placed on a glass slide þ drop of natural sebum.
Table 1
Human Skin Wettability
Volar forearm
Forehead
Parameters
No treated
Degreasing “ether”
No treated
Degreasing “ether”
yw
808 (14); 848 (15)
928 (15); 1018 (7)
57–738 (19); 608 (17)
848 (7)
888 (7); 918 (16)
67–718 (18)
gc
26 (20); 26.8 (21)
21.6 (24)
33.2a
22.4a
27 (22); 27.5 (23,24)
30.6 (15)
Ho
62% (10)
70% (10)
54%
69%
gs
38.5 (7,10)
32.4 (7)
42–46 (19)
34.5 (7)
aData unpublished.
Abbreviations: yw, water contact angle; Ho, surface hydrophobicity; gc, critical surface tension (in mJ/m2);
gs, surface free energy (in mJ/m2).
Figure 6
Spreading of sebum on water: hydrolipidic emulsion “Garde d’eau” formation. (A) Describes the
meeting between a drop of water and a drop of sebum deposited on a hair, (B) described the same phenomenon,
but the hair and the drops are placed on a glass side.
Skin Wettability and Friction
431

=== Page 449 ===
This emulsion form suggests that the quality of the skin hydration depends on the
quality of its hydrolipidic layer/emulsion and consequently depends on a certain equilibrium
between the two phases (aqueous and oily). This behaviour of sebum to wrap around the
water is very important to understand the role of the hydrolipidic layer/emulsion in dry and
atopic skin.
HUMAN SKIN FRICTION COEFFICIENT
The skin has three main mechanical roles: (i) to instantly or permanently match the changes in
shape and volume of the underlying organs and the adipose tissue, (ii) to protect them against
mechanical external aggressions, and (iii) to facilitate the adherence of palms and soles to the
objects and ground (26).
The frictional behavior of the skin with different materials plays a critical role in the
sensory perception of things that we come into contact with. The friction is extremely important
in our perception of cosmetic application such as antiaging cream and moisturizers (27).
When touching an object, a contact is formed between our skin and the object. The
tribological properties of such a contact influence how an object is perceived. Sensory
perception is an important factor in the decision-making process of consumers (28). Even with
closed eyes one can distinguish between a silk and a cotton fabric. A simple friction of the
fingers brings considerable information on the rubbed skin: roughness, softness, dry/
hydrated/fatty (oily) skin, hairs, etc. The friction is also very important for the clinician.
The friction coefficient is the measurement of the level of sliding between two surfaces.
The initial force to start the slide is called “the dynamic friction coefficient,” while the force
necessary to continue this same slide is called “the kinetic friction coefficient.” A high friction
coefficient represents a weak slide, while a low friction coefficient indicates a large slide.
The review of the published literature on skin friction shows a wide range of measured
values of m (Table 2).
These differences indicate that the assessment of the friction coefficient of the skin is a
highly complex problem. It involves skin elasticity, skin anisotropy, microtopography, anisotropy
of the skin relief, nature of material employed, skin physicochemical nature, variation in testing
conditions, and individual differences in measuring techniques. This last point can be divided
into two types of designs for the test apparatus. One design is incorporated linear motion,
wherein a probe is pressed onto the surface and dragged across the skin in a straight line. The
other design is rotational and consists of a probe pressed onto and rotated against the skin
surface. The friction coefficient does not vary significantly with gender but varies considerably
among the anatomical regions of the body (33,35,37); the age effect was also measured (34,35,37).
The friction coefficient is influenced by load (34,36,41,42); however, it is increased because of
water application (36,39,43). On the other hand, the application of petrolatum and glycerine
decreases the friction coefficient immediately on the forearm and on the hand and this effect lasts
for at least one hour after application (42). The application of isopropyl alcohol (36) and washing
with soap (44) dry the skin and decrease its friction coefficient. The finger has a friction coefficient
m ranged from 0.27 to 0.70 and varying among individuals because of different states of skin
hydration (38). Recently, our group (18) showed a significant difference (p < 0.05) of m measured
on the forehead depending on the ethnic affiliation.
In 2004 (16), we showed the influence of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic characteristics
of sliding and slider surfaces on m. In this study, the wettability parameters for six surfaces
[volar forearm, Teflon1, silicone impression material (Silflo1), vinyl polysiloxane impression
material resin, steel, and glass] were measured and their influences were compared to the
friction coefficient m.
The tribometer used (Fig. 7) was developed and validated (16,34,45) to characterize the
friction properties between skin in vivo and different sliding surfaces. A sliding ball of 10-mm
diameter was pressed on the ventral forearm with a constant normal load (FN) of 0.1 N and
then moved at a constant velocity of 0.5 mm/sec. In order to maintain surfaces as flat as
possible, a short sliding distance of 10 to 15 mm was selected.
In this study, we showed that when the skin is rubbed against a hydrophobic surface
such as Teflon, the friction coefficient m is lower than when rubbed against a hydrophilic
surface such as glass or steel: hydrophobic surfaces ¼ lowest friction coefficient.
432
Elkhyat et al.

=== Page 450 ===
Table 2
Human Skin Friction Coefficient (m)
Author
Sliding material
Motion of test
m
Comaish et al. (29)
Teflon(1) Nylon(2)
Polyethylene(3) Wood(4)
Linear
0.2(1)–0.45(2)–0.3(3)–0.4(4) forearm
Kenins (30)
Different wool fabrics
Linear
0.32–0.48: dry skin
0.48–1.23: wet skin
(forearm, finger)
El-Shimi (31)
Steel (rougha, smoothb)
Rotational
0.2–0.4a
0.3–0.6b
(volar forearm)
Highley et al. (32)
Nylon
Rotational
0.19–0.28 (volar forearm)
Cua et al. (33)
Teflon
Rotational
0.34 (forehead)
0.26 (volar forearm)
0.21 (palm), 0.12 (abdomen)
0.25 (upper back)
Asserin et al. (34)
Ruby
Linear
0.7 (volar forearm)
Elkhyat et al. (16)
Teflon(1) Steel(2) Glass(3)
Linear
0.18(1)–0.42(2)–0.74(3) (volar forearm)
Elsner et al. (35)
Teflon
Rotational
0.48 (volar forearm)
0.66 (vulva)
Sivamani et al. (36)
Steel
Linear
0.56 (normal skin: dorsal finger)
0.50 (isopropyl alcohol exposure:
dorsal finger)
0.2 (normal skin in vitro)
0.3 (water exposed skin in vitro)
Sivamani et al. (37)
Steel
Linear
0.4–0.6 (volar forearm)
Derler et al. (38)
Textile sample
Linear
0.27–0.7 (finger)
Egawa et al. (39)
Finger print
0.4 (volar forearm)
Lode´n et al. (40)
Steel
Rotational
0.55 (dorsum of the hand)
1.1 (lower back)
0.65 (volar forearm)
respectively in atopic skin
0.4–0.65–0.55
Fotoh et al. (18)
Steel
Linear
0.7–0.9 forehead
Figure 7
Linear tribometer for measuring in vivo friction coefficient.
Skin Wettability and Friction
433

=== Page 451 ===
GENERAL DISCUSSION
In this chapter, we showed that the sebum decreases the skin hydrophobia, and the wetting
parameters of the surfaces in contact can play an important role in the friction phenomenon.
The largest hydrophobicity of the abdomen (Fig. 5) explains its lowest friction coefficient
compared to the forehead measured by Cua et al. (33). Water application decreases the skin
hydrophobia and consequently increases its friction coefficient measured by Egawa (39),
Sivamani (36), and Lewis (43).
The decrease in m after degreasing (isopropyl alcohol) (36) or after washing with soap
and water (44) is quite normal; indeed these treatments increase the skin hydrophobia
(Table 1), and the increased skin hydrophobia with age or in atopic skin leads to low m
reported in the literature (34,40).
The role of the surface lipids was speculated as one possible factor contributing to the
frictional properties of the skin, and the correlation between m and the skin lipid content was
evaluated: Cua et al. (46) showed that the skin lipid content plays a role in the frictional
properties of the skin. Moreover, in the skin, the friction resistance depends on hydrophilic and
lipophilic elements present on the cutaneous surface. Fotoh et al. (18) assumed that the Ho/Hi
of the cutaneous hydrolipidic film is different between the different ethnic groups studied.
Black women could have a decreased skin friction coefficient as well as an increased cutaneous
hydrophobicity compared with mixed race and Caucasian women.
CONCLUSION
The capacity of the skin to be wetted by water is a major parameter of the cutaneous surface
ecosystem. This especially influences the equilibrium of the resident bacterial flora (either
lipophilic or hydrophilic) and the possible surface colonization by pathogenic bacteria (usually
hydrophilic). It also controls some functional features of the skin surface, such as triglyceride
hydrolysis, skin pH, and the penetration of water into the stratum corneum, with, as major
consequences, the modification of the skin mechanical behavior, permeability, and
desquamation process.
We have seen that the sebum can surround water in the form of micro-emulsion to form
a sort of Garde d’eau (water storage), and from this observation, we can suppose that the
quality of the skin depends also on the hydrolipidic emulsion quality. This form of the
hydrolipidic layer/emulsion allows the skin hydration and minimizes its TEWL.
Elias (47) noted that a significant part of the skin barrier function is provided by the
stratum corneum lipids, which are suspected to play a critical role in the water-retaining
properties of the stratum corneum. Grubauer (48) suggested that the TEWL serves as a signal
for an increased lipid synthesis after barrier damage. Atopic skin shows an increased TEWL
and indicates a defective barrier function (49,50).
The wettability and the friction coefficient of the skin provide considerable information:
They can assist in the assessment of the skin nature (normal/dry/greasy skin) and its
hydrolipidic layer/emulsion. They can also help to evaluate the effects of cosmetics and
pharmaceuticals application in the Ho/Hi of the cutaneous surface.
REFERENCES
1. Bair RE. Noninvasive, rapid characterization of human skin in situ. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1978; 29:
283–306.
2. Agache P, Elkhyat A, Mavon A. Measurement of skin surface wettability. In: Agache P, Humbert P,
eds. Measurement of the Skin: Non-Invasive Investigations, Physiology, Normal Constants. Berlin:
Springer, 2004:87–91.
3. Young T. An essay on the cohesion of fluids. Phil Roy Soc (London) 1805; 95:65–87.
4. Fowkes FM. Attractive forces at interfaces. Ind Eng Chem 1964; 56:40–52.
5. Wenzel RN. Resistance of solids surfaces to wetting by water. Ind Eng Chem 1936; 28:988–994.
6. Neumann AW, Good RJ. Techniques of measuring contact angles. Coll Surf Sci 1979; 11:31–91.
7. Mavon A. Zahouani H, Redoules D, et al. Sebum and stratum corneum lipids increase human skin
surface free energy as determined from contact angle measurements: a study on two anatomical sites.
Coll Surf B: Biointerf 1997; 8:147–155.
434
Elkhyat et al.

=== Page 452 ===
8. Zisman WA. Contact angle, wetting, adhesion. In: Fowkes FM, ed. Advanced Chemical Series no. 43.
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 1964:1–51.
9. Norris DA, Puri N, Labib ME, et al. Determining the absolute surface hydrophobicity of
microparticulates using thin layer wicking. J Control Release 1999; 59:173–185.
10. Elkhyat A, Agache P, Zahouani H, et al. A new method to measure in vivo human skin hydrophobia.
Int J Cosmet Sci 2001; 23:347–352.
11. Owens DK, Wendt R. Estimation of the surface free energy of polymers. J Appl Polym Sci 1969;
13:1741–1747.
12. Van Oss CJ, Good RJ, Chaudhury MK. Additive and non additive surface tension components and
interpretation of contact angles. Langmuir 1988; 4:884–891.
13. Good RJ, Van Oss CJ. The modern theory of contact angles and the hydrogen bond components of
surface energies. In: Schrader ME, Loeb GI, eds. Modern Approaches to Wettability: Theory and
Application. New York: Plenum Press, 1992:1–27.
14. Elkhyat A, Courderot-Masuyer C, Mac-Mary S, et al. Assessment of spray application of Saint
Gervais1 water effects on skin wettability by contact angle measurement comparison with bidistilled
water. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:283–286.
15. Schott H. Contact angles and wettability of human skin. J Pharm Sci 1971; 60:1893–1895.
16. Elkhyat A, Courderot-Masuyer C, Gharbi T, et al. Influence of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic
characteristics of sliding and slider surfaces on friction coefficient: in vivo human skin friction
comparison. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:215–221.
17. Afifi Y, Elkhyat A, Hassam B, et al. Mouillabilite´ de la peau et peau se´borrhe´ique. In: Uhoda E, Paye M,
Pierrard GE, eds. Actualite´s en Inge´nierie Cutane´e, vol. 4. Paris: ESKA, 2006:111–117.
18. Fotoh C, Elkhyat A, Mac-Mary S, et al. Characterization of cutaneous specificities of young women
African and Caribbean, black and mixed-race living under temperate climate. Abstract of papers, 21st
World Congress of Dermatology. Sept 30-Oct 5, 2007; Buenos Aires.
19. Mavon A, Redoules D, Humbert Ph, et al. Changes in sebum levels and skin surface free energy
components following skin surface washing. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 1998; 10:243–250.
20. Rosemberg A, William R, Cohen G. Interaction involved in wetting of human skin. J Pharm Sci 1973;
62:920–922.
21. El-Shimi A, Goddard ED. Wettability of some low energy surfaces. J Colloid Interface Sci 1973; 48:
242–248.
22. Ginn ME, Noyes GM, Jungermann E. The contact angle on water on viable human skin. J Colloid
Interface Sci 1968; 26:146–151.
23. Adamson AW, Kunichika K, Shirlev F. Dermatometry for Coeds. J Chem Educ 1968; 45:702–704.
24. Elkhyat A, Mavon A, Leduc M, et al. Skin critical surface tension. A way to assess the skin wettability
quantitatively. Skin Res Technol 1996; 2:91–96.
25. Gloor M, Franz P, Friedrich HC. Untersuchungen u¨ber die Physiologie der Talgdru¨sen und u¨ber den
Einflub der Hautoberflaschenlipide auf die benetzarkeit der Haut. Arch Dermatol Forsch 1973;
248:79–88.
26. Agache P, Varchon D. Skin mechanical function. In: Agache P, Humbert P, eds. Measurement of the
Skin: Non-Invasive Investigations, Physiology, Normal Constants. Berlin: Springer, 2004:429–445.
27. Gee MG, Tomlins P, Calver A, et al. A new friction measurements system for the frictional component
of touch. Wear 2005; 259:1437–1442.
28. Bongaerts JHH, Fourtouni K, Stokes JR. Soft-tribology. Lubrication in a compliant PDMS-PDMS
contact. Trib Int 2007; 40(10–12):1531–1542.
29. Comaish S, Bottoms E. The skin and friction: deviations from Amonton’s laws, and the effects of
hydration and lubrication. Br J Dermatol 1971; 84:37–43.
30. Kenins P. Influence of fiber-type and moisture on measured fabric-to-skin friction. Text Res J 1994;
64:722–728.
31. El-Shimi AF. In vivo skin friction measurements. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:37–51.
32. Highley DR, Coomey M, Denbeste M, et al. Frictional properties of skin. J Invest Dermatol 1977;
69:303–305.
33. Cua A, Wilheim KP, Maibach HI. Friction properties of human skin: relation to age, sex and
anatomical region, stratum corneum hydration and transepidermal water loss. Br J Dermatol 1990;
123:473–479.
34. Asserin J, Zahouani H, Humbert Ph, et al. Measurement of the friction coefficient of the human skin
in vivo. Quantification of the cutaneous smoothness. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 2000; 19:1–12.
35. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Frictional properties of human forearm and vulvar skin: influence of
age and correlation with transepidermal water loss and capacitance. Dermatologica 1990; 181:88–91.
36. Sivamani RK, Goodman J, Gitis NG, et al. Coefficient of friction: tribological studies in man—an
overview. Skin Res Technol 2003; 9:227–234.
37. Sivamani RK, Wu G, Gitis NV, et al. Tribological testing of skin products: gender, age, and ethnicity
on the volar forearm. Skin Res Technol 2003; 9:1–7.
Skin Wettability and Friction
435

=== Page 453 ===
38. Derler S, Schrade U, Gerhardt LC. Tribology of human skin and mechanical skin equivalents in
contact with textiles. Wear 2007; 263:1112–1116.
39. Egawa M, Oguri M, Hirao T, et al. The evaluation of skin friction using a frictional feel analyzer. Skin
Res Technol 2002; 8:41–51.
40. Lode´n M, Olsson H, Axe´ll T, et al. Friction, capacitance and transepidermal water loss (TEWL) in dry
atopic and normal skin. Br J Dematol 1992; 126:137–141.
41. Koudine AA, Barquins M, Anthoine PH, et al. Frictional properties of skin: proposal of a new
approach. Int J Cosmet Sci 2000; 22:11–20.
42. Ramalho A, Silva CL, Pais A, et al. In vivo friction study of human skin: influence of moisturizers on
different anatomical sites. Wear 2007; 10:1044–1049.
43. Lewis R, Menardi C, Yoxall A, et al. Finger friction: grip and opening packaging. Wear 2007; 263(7):
1124–1132.
44. O’Meara DM, Smith RM. Static friction properties between human palmar skin and five grabrail
materials. Ergonomics 2001; 44:973–988.
45. Ranc H, Elkhyat A, Servais C, et al. Friction coefficient and wettability of oral mucosal tissue: changes
induced by a salivary layer. Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Aspects 2006; 276:155–161.
46. Cua AB, Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Skin surface lipid and skin friction: relation to age, sex and
anatomical region. Skin Pharmacol 1995; 8:246–251.
47. Elias PM. Lipids and the epidermal permeability barrier. Arch Dermatol Res 1981; 270:95–117.
48. Grubauer G, Elias PM, Feingold KR. Transepidermal water loss: the signal for recovery of barrier
structure and function. J Lipid Res 1989; 30:323–333.
49. Thune P. Evaluation of the hydration and the water-holding capacity in atopic skin and so-called dry
skin. Acta Derm Venereol Suppl (Stockh) 1989; 144:133–135.
50. Finlay AY, Nicholls S, King CS, et al. The “dry” non-eczematous skin associated with atopic eczema.
Br J Dermatol 1980; 102:249–256.
436
Elkhyat et al.

=== Page 454 ===
41
Classification of Irritant Contact Dermatitis
Ai-Lean Chew
St. John’s Institute of Dermatology, Guy’s and St. Thomas’ Hospital, London, U.K.
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Contact dermatitis is defined as inflammation of the skin invoked as a result of exposure to an
exogenous agent and constitutes a key portion of occupational disorders in industrialized
societies.
In 1898, contact dermatitis was first appreciated to have more than one mechanism and is
now generally divided into irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) and allergic contact dermatitis (ACD)
on the basis of these mechanistic differences. ACD is a delayed (type IV) hypersensitivity
reaction, mediated by T cells and requiring prior sensitization, while ICD has a non-
immunological mechanism, thus not requiring sensitization. Clinical distinction of the two
processes is often challenging, as morphology and histopathology of irritant and allergic
dermatitis reactions can be virtually indistinguishable. The two processes may, and often do,
coexist, thereby further complicating matters.
The morphological spectrum of ICD is broad and frequently impossible to distinguish
from ACD and even endogenous (atopic) dermatitis. Chronological descriptions of these
processes are often clinically used. “Acute, subacute, and chronic dermatitides” are terms
applicable to ACD and ICD as well as atopic dermatitis. The erythema, edema, and vesiculation
seen in acute dermatitis or the hyperkeratosis, lichenification, and fissuring seen in the chronic
phase are largely nonspecific signs. Although chronological classification has its uses, the main
classification of irritation is now based on both morphology and clinical course of the dermatitis.
CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION OF ICD
ICD (synonyms: cutaneous irritation, irritant dermatitis) is the biological response of the skin to a
variety of external stimuli that induce skin inflammation without the production of specific
antibodies. Formerly considered a monomorphous process, it is now understood to be a
complex biological syndrome, with a diverse clinical appearance, pathophysiology, and
natural history. The clinical appearance and course of ICD vary depending on multiple
external and internal factors. This diversity in clinical presentation has generated a
classification scheme, on the basis of both morphology and mode of onset. The various
subtypes of ICD and their respective prognoses are tabulated in Table 1.
Acute ICD
When exposure is sufficient and the offending agent is potent, classic signs of acute skin
irritation are seen. Erythema, edema, inflammation, and vesiculation are typical features,
although acute irritation may range from mild erythema through exudative cutaneous
inflammation to ulcerative lesions and frank epidermal necrosis, depending on factors such as
the chemical and exposure time (1). At the extreme end of this spectrum is the “chemical
burn”—this entity is recognized by severe tissue damage as a result of exposure to highly
alkaline or acidic compounds—most often as a result of an industrial accident. Symptoms of
acute ICD are pruritus, burning, stinging, and pain.
In keeping with an exogenous dermatosis, acute ICD usually exhibits an asymmetrical
distribution and sharply demarcated borders. These borders delineate the area of exposure to the

=== Page 455 ===
offending chemical. Contact with a potent irritant is often accidental, and an acute ICD is elicited
in almost anyone, independent of constitutional susceptibility—in contrast to chronic ICD.
This classic, acutely developing dermatitis usually heals soon after exposure, assuming
there is no reexposure—this is known as the “decrescendo phenomenon.” In contrast, ACD
usually exhibits a “crescendo phenomenon,” i.e., transient worsening of symptoms and signs,
despite removal of the allergen. In unusual cases, ICD may persist for months after exposure,
followed by complete resolution.
The availability of the material safety data sheet and data from the single application
Draize rabbit test combined with activities of industrial hygienists and other informed
personnel have greatly decreased the frequency of such dermatitis in industry.
Delayed Acute ICD
Some chemicals produce acute irritation in a delayed manner so that inflammation is retarded
until 8 to 24 hours or more after exposure (2). Except for the delayed onset, the clinical
appearance and course resemble those of acute ICD. The delayed acute irritant dermatitis,
because of its delayed onset and atypical crescendo periodicity, is often confused with ACD;
appropriately performed diagnostic patch tests easily separate the two, i.e., the substances
implicated in delayed, acute ICD would result in negative patch test results. In delayed acute
ICD, a burning sensation predominates, rather than pruritus. Examples of substances causing
delayed irritation are hexanediol and butanediol diacrylates (2), dithranol (anthralin), calcipotriol,
and benzalkonium chloride.
Irritant Reaction
Individuals extensively exposed to irritants often develop erythematous, chapped skin in the
first months of exposure. This irritant reaction may be considered a pre-eczematous expression
of acute skin irritation. The term “irritant reaction” is now increasingly used if the clinical
picture is monomorphic, rather than the usual polymorphic appearance of ICD, i.e., only one of
the parameters usually seen in ICD are present, e.g., scaling, erythema, vesiculation, pustules,
or erosions. This pattern is frequently seen in hairdressers and other wet workers. Frequently,
this condition heals spontaneously, with hardening of the skin. However, repeated irritant
reactions can sometimes lead to contact dermatitis, usually with good prognosis. Compounds
that cause irritant reactions are typically mild irritants, such as detergents, soaps, and water.
Chronic ICD
When exposure inducing an acute irritant dermatitis is repeated, the dermatitis tends to persist
and becomes chronic (more than 6 weeks has been suggested as an arbitrary threshold period).
In chronic ICD (synonyms: cumulative ICD, traumiterative dermatitis, wear and tear dermatitis), the
frequency of exposure is too high in relation to the skin recovery time.
Multiple subthreshold skin insults lead to a manifest dermatitis when the irritant load
exceeds the individual’s elicitation threshold for visible effects. Chronic ICD was called
“traumiterative dermatitis” in the older German literature (“traumiterative” ¼ traumas repeating)
(3,4). Classic signs are erythema and increasing xerosis (dryness), followed by hyperkeratosis
with frequent fissuring and occasional erythema. The lesions are usually localized but ill
Table 1
Ten Subtypes of ICD
Irritation
Onset
Prognosis
1. Acute ICD
Acute—often single exposure
Good
2. Delayed acute ICD
Delayed—12–24 hr or longer
Good
3. Irritant reaction
Acute—often multiple exposures
Good
4. Chronic ICD
Slowly developing (wk–yr)
Variable
5. Traumatic ICD
Slowly developing after preceding trauma
Variable
6. Acneiform ICD
Moderately slowly developing (wk–mo)
Variable
7. Nonerythematous
(suberythematous) irritation
Slowly developing
Variable
8. Subjective (sensory) irritation
Acute
Excellent
9. Friction dermatitis
Slowly developing
Variable
10. Asteatotic irritant eczema
Slowly developing
Variable
438
Chew and Maibach

=== Page 456 ===
defined. Pruritus and pain due to fissures are symptoms of chronic ICD. Chronic ICD often
presents as hand eczema (“housewives” eczema’).
Chronic ICD is the most common type of ICD. This clinical picture may develop after
days, weeks, or years of subtle exposure to chemical substances. Variation in individual
susceptibility and the physical properties of the irritating substance increase the multiplicity of
clinical findings. Delayed onset and variable attack lead to confusion with ACD. To rule out an
allergic etiology, appropriate diagnostic patch testing is indicated. Models of chronic ICD have
been developed, contributing to product evaluation and mechanistic insights (5,6).
Traumatic ICD
Traumatic ICD develops after acute skin trauma, such as burns, lacerations, or acute ICD. The
skin does not completely heal, but erythema, vesicles, papules, and scaling appear at the site of
injury. The clinical course later resembles discoid (nummular) dermatitis. It may be compounded
by a concurrent allergen exposure. The healing period is generally prolonged.
Often these patients are considered to have factitial dermatitis because of a healing phase
followed by exacerbation. Although factitial aspects may occur in some patients, this peculiar
form of irritation appears to be a disease sui generis. Its chronicity and recalcitrance to therapy
provides a challenge to both patient and physician.
Acneiform ICD
Certain exogenous substances have the capacity to elicit an acneiform eruption (7,8), and even
allergic reactions may sometimes be pustular or follicular (9). Acneiform ICD (synonyms:
pustular ICD, follicular ICD) should always be considered in the differential diagnosis of an
adult with acneiform lesions. The pustules are usually sterile and transient.
In occupational exposure, only a minority of subjects develop pustular or acneiform
dermatitis. Thus, the development of this type of ICD appears to be dependent on both
constitutional and chemical factors. Chloracne is an industrial disease caused by exposure to
chlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons, in particular chlorinated dioxins, which are the most
potent acnegenic agents. Many of the chloracnegens are also hepatotoxic; therefore, this is a
disease of medical importance. Acneiform ICD may also develop from exposure to metals,
mineral oils, greases, tar, asphalt, cutting oils, and metalworking fluids.
Acne cosmetica represents acneiform ICD caused by cosmetics. Pomade acne is a well-
known form of acne cosmetica, seen in Afro-Caribbean women who apply vegetable oils to
their skin (10). A similar problem has been reported with applications of white petrolatum (11).
Nowadays, most cosmetics available in Western countries are noncomedogenic and
nonacnegenic.
Non-erythematous or Suberythematous Irritation
In the early stages of skin irritation, subtle skin damage may occur without visible
inflammation. As a correlate of non-visible irritation, objectively registered alterations in the
damaged epidermis have been reported via cutaneous bioengineering techniques (12–14). It is
customary in Japan to screen new chemicals, cosmetics, and textiles for subtle signs of stratum
corneum (SC) damage, employing replicas of SC (the Kawai method; Kawai 1971). A similar
technique, squamometry or corneosurfametry, has now been refined to detect subtle subclinical
alterations in the SC caused by application of mild irritants (15).
Subjective or Sensory Irritation
Some individuals (“stingers”) experience itching, stinging, burning, or tingling sensations on
contact with certain chemicals (14,16), despite a distinct lack of objective signs on clinical
examination. Despite the lack of clinical manifestations, the subjective sensations are
reproducible, typically occurring within seconds to minutes following exposure; this type of
irritation is known as subjective or sensory irritation. Lactic acid is a model for this non-visible
cutaneous irritation. The threshold for this reaction varies between subjects, independent of
susceptibility to other irritation types. The quality as well as the concentration of the exposing
agent is also important, and neural pathways may be contributory, but the pathomechanism is
unknown. Some sensory irritation may be subclinical contact urticaria. Screening raw
ingredients and final formulations in the guinea pig ear swelling test (17) or the human
forehead assay allows us to minimize the amount of subclinical contact urticaria.
Classification of Irritant Contact Dermatitis
439

=== Page 457 ===
Although subjective irritation may have a neural component, recent studies suggest that
cutaneous vasculature may be more responsive in stingers than non-stingers (14,18). At least
10% of women complain of stinging with certain facial products; thus, further work is needed
to develop a strategy to overcome this type of discomfort.
Friction Dermatitis
Repeated friction of low intensity is known to induce callus formation (hyperkeratosis and
acanthosis), hardening of the skin, hyperpigmentation, and friction blisters in normal skin. In
atopic people, lichenification and lichen simplex chronicus may ensue a result of friction. All of
the above may be considered as adaptive phenomena to friction and should not be confused
with friction dermatitis.
True friction dermatitis is the development of ICD in response to low-grade friction—this
is seen clinically as erythema, scaling, fissuring, and itching surrounding the area of frictional
contact. The syndrome has been characterized by Susten (19). Cases of occupational friction
dermatitis in the literature are seldom documented, but most often reported in association with
paper work (20). More recently, a short collection of further cases of friction dermatitis has
been published (21).
Asteatotic Irritant Eczema
Asteatotic eczema (synonyms: asteatotic dermatitis, exsiccation eczematid, eczema cracquele) is a
variant of ICD seen in elderly individuals, as a result of worsening xerosis, particularly during
dry winter months. Clinically, the skin is dry (xerosis), with loss of smoothness, ichthyosiform
scale, and cracking of the superficial epidermal layers, often associated with eczematous
changes. The term “eczema cracquele” refers to the cracked, patchy eczematous appearance
(likened to cracked porcelain, or “crazy paving”) usually seen on the lower legs of these
individuals. An uncomfortable sensation of “tightness” and pruritus is often felt.
Xerosis is a result of low water content in the SC, causing the SC to lose its suppleness
and the corneocytes to be shed in large polygonal scales. Xerosis is usually more pronounced
in the elderly and in atopic individuals. Environmental insults, such as low humidity, low
temperatures, and very high doses of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) [>3 or 4 minimal erythema
doses (MEDs)] can help accelerate this process. In an occupational setting, this is sometimes
combined with repeated exposure to wet work, chemical insults, and friction, cumulating in
perturbation of the skin barrier. Skin barrier dysfunction then leaves the skin even more
vulnerable to exogenous insults and asteatotic irritant eczema ensues.
Miscellaneous
Airborne ICD is not included as one of the 10 genotypes as the mechanisms are similar to acute
or chronic ICD; the only difference is that the irritant substance is dispersed and transported in
the air before contact with skin. This causes dermatitis on exposed areas of skin, most
commonly on the face, and may mimic photoallergic reactions.
Phototoxicity or photoirritation is another form of skin irritation following cutaneous or
systemic exposure to a phototoxic agent in combination with appropriate radiation (most often
in the UVA spectrum). Phytophotodermatitis specifically represents phototoxic dermatitis in
response to plants or plant derivatives, such as species in the Umbelliferae (e.g., celery, carrot)
and Rutaceae (e.g., lime, lemon, bergamot) families. Berloque dermatitis refers to fragrance
dermatitis because of bergapten, the photoactive compound found in oil of bergamot, an
ingredient found in fragrances; this compound has now been removed from most perfumes
and substituted with artificial or highly refined bergamot oil.
Other reactions, which can be caused by contact with irritant substances, but do not fall
within the scope of this chapter, include pigmentary alterations, nonimmunological contact
urticaria, granulomatous reactions, and alopecia.
REFERENCES
1. Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Factors predisposing to cutaneous irritation. Dermatol Clin 1990; 8:17–22.
2. Malten KE, den Arend JA, Wiggers RE. Delayed irritation: hexanediol diacrylate and butanediol
diacrylate. Contact Dermatitis 1979; 3:178–184.
440
Chew and Maibach

=== Page 458 ===
3. von Hagerman G. Uber das “traumiterative” (toxische) Ekzem. Dermatologica 1957; 115:525–529.
4. Agrup G. Hand eczema and other dermatoses in South Sweden (Thesis). Acta Dermatol Venereol
Suppl (Stockh) 1969; 49:61.
5. Freeman S, Maibach HI. Study of irritant contact dermatitis produced by repeat patch test with
sodium lauryl sulfate and assessed by visual methods, transepidermal water loss, and laser Doppler
velocimetry. J Am Acad Dermatol 1988; 19:496–502.
6. Widmer J, Elsner P, Burg G. Skin irritant reactivity following experimental cumulative irritant contact
dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1994; 30:35–39.
7. Wahlberg JE, Maibach HI. Identification of contact pustulogens. In: Marzulli FN, Maibach HI, eds.
Dermatotoxicology. 2nd ed. New York: Hemisphere, 1982:627–635.
8. Dooms-Goossens E, Delusschene KM, Gevers DM. Contact dermatitis caused by airborne irritant.
J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15:1–10.
9. Fischer T, Rystedt I. False positive, follicular and irritant patch test reactions to metal salts. Contact
Dermatitis 1985; 12:93–98.
10. Plewig G, Fulton J, Kligman AM. Pomade acne. Arch Dermatol 1970; 101:580–584.
11. Frankel E. Acne secondary to white petrolatum use. Arch Dermatol 1985; 121:589–590.
12. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Racial differences in sodium lauryl sulphate induced cutaneous irritation:
black and white. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 18:65–70.
13. van der Valk PGM, Nater JPK, Bleumink E. Vulnerability of the skin to surfactants in different groups
in eczema patients and controls as measured by water vapour loss. Clin Exp Dermatol 1985; 10:98–103.
14. Lammintausta K, Maibach HI, Wilson D. Mechanisms of subjective (sensory) irritation propensity to
nonimmunologic contact urticaria and objective irritation in stingers. Dermatosen Beruf Umwelt 1988;
36:45–49.
15. Charbonnier V, Morrison BM, Paye M, et al. Open application assay in investigation of subclinical
irritant dermatitis induced by sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) in man: advantage of squamometry. Skin
Res Technol 1998; 4:1–7.
16. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. Recognition of chemically vulnerable and delicate skin. In: Frosch PJ,
Kligman AM, eds. Principles of Cosmetics for Dermatologists. St. Louis: C V Mosby, 1982:287–296.
17. Lahti A, Maibach HI. Guinea pig ear swelling test as an animal model for nonimmunologic contact
urticaria. In: Maibach HI, Lowe NI, eds. Models in Dermatology, vol. II. New York: Karger, 1985:356–359.
18. Berardesca E, Cespa M, Farinelli N, et al. In vivo transcutaneous penetration of nicotinates and
sensitive skin. Contact Dermatitis 1991; 25:35–38.
19. Susten AS. The chronic effects of mechanical trauma to the skin: a review of the literature. Am J Ind
Med 1985; 18:281–288.
20. Menne T, Hjorth N. Frictional contact dermatitis. Am J Ind Med 1985; 8:401.
21. Freeman S. Repeated low-grade frictional trauma. In: Kanerva L, Elsner P, Wahlberg JE, et al. eds.
Handbook of Occupational Dermatology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2000:111–114.
Classification of Irritant Contact Dermatitis
441

=== Page 460 ===
42
Principles and Mechanisms of Skin Irritation
Sibylle Schliemann, Maria Breternitz, and Peter Elsner
Department of Dermatology, University of Jena, Jena, Germany
INTRODUCTION
In contrast to allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) is the result of
unspecified damage attributable to contact with chemical substances that cause an inflamma-
tory reaction of the skin (1) and individual susceptibility (2). The clinical appearance of ICD is
extremely variable. It is determined by the type of irritant and a dose-effect relationship (3).
The clinical morphology of acute ICD as one side of the spectrum is characterized by erythema,
edema, vesicles that may coalesce, bullae, and oozing. Necrosis and ulceration can be seen with
corrosive materials. Clinical appearance of chronic ICD is dominated by redness, lichen-
ification, excoriations, scaling, and hyperkeratosis.
Any site of skin may be affected. Most frequently the hands as human “tools” come into
extensive contact with irritants, whereas most adverse reactions to cosmetics occur in the face
because of the particular sensitivity of this skin region. Airborne ICD develops in uncovered
skin areas, mostly in the face and especially the periorbital region after exposure to volatile
irritants or vapor (4–6).
Despite their different pathogenesis, ACD and ICD, particularly chronic conditions,
show a remarkable similarity with respect to clinical appearance, histopathology (7,8), and
immunohistology (9,10). Therefore, ICD can be regarded as an exclusion diagnosis after
negative patch testing. The histological pattern of chronic ICD is characterized by hyper- and
parakeratosis, spongiosis, exocytosis, moderate to marked acanthosis, and mononuclear
perivascular infiltrates with increased mitotic activity (11,12).
MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF SKIN IRRITANCY
As mentioned, striking clinical similarities exist between ICD and ACD, and even extensive
immunostaining of biopsies does not allow discrimination between the two types of dermatitis
(10). Nevertheless, the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms are thought to be
substantially different (13). Attempts to differentiate the types of contact dermatitis with
new methods are constantly under way. Recently, in vivo reflectance confocal microscopy has
been suggested as an adjunctive tool in contact dermatitis diagnosis (14). With this technique,
features of ACD and ICD that include spongiosis, exocytosis, vesicle formation, and blood
vessel dilatation can be visualized. Hallmarks of ICD that are stratum corneum disruption,
epidermal necrosis, and hyperproliferation, whereas ACD is supposed to present more typically
with vesicle formation (14). However, these findings probably relate to acute dermatitis, whereas
chronic allergic and irritant dermatitis can be expected to be undistinguishable by in vivo
reflectance confocal microscopy just as they are by light microscopy.
In contrast to ACD, ICD lacks hapten-specific T-lymphocytes. The pathogenic pathway
in the acute phases of ICD starts with the penetration of the irritant into the barrier, either
activation or mild damage of keratinocytes, and release of mediators of inflammation with
unspecific T-cell activation (15). In a recently published study of Meller et al., it was
demonstrated that chemokine responses are helpful characteristics to distinguish the chemical-
induced allergic from the irritant skin inflammation. They found that allergic and irritant skin
responses have distinct molecular expression profiles. Chemokine genes predominantly
regulated by T-cell effector cytokines demonstrated differential upregulation in hapten-specific
skin inflammation. CXCR3 ligands, such as CXCL9 and CXCL10, were selectively induced
during hapten-specific, but not irritant-induced skin inflammation. It was demonstrated that
effector cytokines released by a small number of activated hapten-specific memory T cells

=== Page 461 ===
stimulate gene expression of a large number of surrounding resident cells, leading to the
production of a discriminative chemokine signature. In contrast, the absence of antigen-
specific T-cell activation in irritant skin responses results in only negligible amounts of T-cell-
derived effector cytokines (16).
Epidermal keratinocytes play a crucial role in the inflammation of ICD; they can be induced
to produce several cytokines and provoke a dose-dependent leukocyte attraction (17). In response
to the impairment of stratum corneum barrier with direct toxic effect on keratinocytes (14,18,19),
preformed IL-1a is released. It stimulates other keratinocytes and fibroblasts to produce more
Il-1a, IL-1b, IL-6 IL-8, and TNF-a (13,20–23). The cytokine-induced cascade leads to
vasodilatation in the dermis and cellular infiltrate in the epidermis (13,24,25). But keratinocytes
also produce anti-inflammatory cytokines to counteract these inflammatory processes. The IL-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) blocks IL-1 activity by competitive binding to the IL-1 receptor
without triggering a signal cascade. IL-10 is another anti-inflammatory cytokine (20,23).
The upregulation of certain adhesion molecules like a6 integrin or contact dermatitis 36 is
independent from the stimulus and not cytokine induced (18,26). A number of agents and
cytokines themselves are capable of mediating cytokine production in keratinocytes. IL-1 and
TNF- a play a role as inflammatory cytokines, IL-8 and IP-10 are known to act as chemotaxins,
and IL-6, IL-7, IL-15, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and TGF-a
can promote growth. Other cytokines, such as IL-10, IL-12, and IL-18, are known to regulate
humoral versus cellular immunity (27). It is still controversial whether the cytokine profile
induced by irritants differs from that induced by allergens (28–31). In irritant reactions, TNF-a,
IL-6, IL-lb, and IL-2 have been reported to be increased (32,33). De Jongh et al. recently
investigated stratum corneum cytokines and skin irritation responses after single and
repetitive exposures to sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) (34). They found an IL-1a decrease of
30% after repeated exposure, while IL-1RA increased 10-fold and IL-8 increased 4-fold.
Baseline IL-1RA and IL-8 values after single exposure were predictors of transepidermal water
loss (TEWL) and erythema. Their results suggest that subjects with higher baseline stratum
corneum levels of IL-1RA and IL-8 have a stronger response to skin irritation and that baseline
levels of these cytokines can serve as indicators of skin irritability (34).
In subliminal contact to irritants, barrier function of the stratum corneum and not the
keratinocyte is the main target of the insulting stimulus. Damage of the lipid barrier of the
stratum corneum is associated with loss of cohesion of corneocytes and desquamation with
increase of TEWL. This is one triggering stimulus for lipid synthesis, and it promotes barrier
restoration (35). Nevertheless, recent studies show that the concept of TEWL increase after SLS
being directly related to a delipidizing effect of surfactants on the stratum corneum cannot be
kept up without limitation. Moreover, SLS exposure for 24 hours causes damage in the deeper
nucleated cells of the epidermis, leaving the lamellar arrangements of lipids intact (36).
However, lipids of the stratum corneum play an important role for barrier function.
Proksch et al. observed an increase in skin lipid synthesis after acute irritation with acetone
treatment (37,38). Heinemann et al. observed an upregulation of the production of ceramide 1
in response to repeated irritation with SLS, thus suggesting that this upregulation might play a
major role in the development of a hardening phenomenon (39). The hardening effect is
understood as the adaptation of skin to repeated exogenous irritative noxes clinically resulting
in stabilized skin state in spite of ongoing irritant exposure.
The stratum corneum influences epidermal proliferation after contact to irritants by
increasing the mitotic activity of basal keratinocytes and in this way enhancing the epidermal
turnover (40,41). Disruption of the stratum corneum can stimulate cytokine production itself,
and in this way promote the inflammatory skin reaction, as shown by Wood et al. (42). They
found an increase of TNF-a, various interleukins, and GM-CSF.
It has been shown that chemically different irritants induce differences in the response in
the epidermis during the first 24 hours with respect to cytokine expression, indicating different
“starting points” for the inflammatory response that results in the same irritant response
clinically after 48 hours. Nonanionic acid, but not SLS, induced an increase in mRNA
expression for IL-6, whereas mRNA expression for GM-CSF was increased after SLS (43).
Forsey et al. saw a proliferation of keratinocytes after 48 hours of exposure, and apoptosis of
keratinocytes after 24 and 48 hours of exposure to SLS. In contrast, nonanionic acid decreased
keratinocyte proliferation after 24 hours of exposure and epidermal cell apoptosis after only
6 hours of exposure (44).
444
Schliemann et al.

=== Page 462 ===
Other interesting details for understanding the molecular mechanisms of skin irritation
have been contributed by Ma et al. (45). They investigated the role of metallothioneins (MTs) in
SLS-induced skin irritation in MT genes I and II knockout mice [MT(–/–)] and demonstrated
that MT (–/–) mice showed a much higher degree of skin inflammation than MT (þ/þ) mice
did. With this result, they suggested that MT I and II genes presumably play an important role
in skin irritation.
FACTORS PREDISPOSING TO CUTANEOUS IRRITATION
The skin of different individuals differs in susceptibility to irritation in a remarkable manner,
and a number of individual factors influencing development of irritant dermatitis that have
been identified include age, genetic background, anatomical region exposed, and preexisting
skin disease.
Although experimental studies did not support sex differences of irritant reactivity
(46,47), females turned out to be at risk in some epidemiological studies (48,49). Presumably
increased exposure to irritants at home, caring for children younger than four years, lack of
dishwashing machine (50), and preference for high-risk occupations contribute to the higher
incidence of ICD in females (47).
The most established individual risk factor of several epidemiological studies concerning
irritant hand dermatitis, is atopic skin diathesis (48,51–54). On the other hand, experimental
studies concerning the reactivity of atopics and nonatopics to standard irritants have given
contradictory results (55,56) and, as shown in a Swedish study, about 25% of the atopics in
extreme-risk occupations, such as hairdressers and nursing assistants, did not develop hand
eczema (57). Age is as well related to irritant susceptibility insofar as irritant reactivity declines
with increasing age. This is true not only for acute but also for cumulative irritant dermatitis
(58,59). Fair skin, especially skin type I, is supposed to be the most reactive to all types of
irritants, and black skin is the most resistant (60–63).
Clinical manifestation of ICD is influenced by type and concentration of irritant, solubility,
vehicle, and length of exposure (64) as well as temperature and mechanical stress. Pathogenesis
of ICD is complex and may be related to a combination of different types of irritants as well as to
different types of irritation. Sequential (“tandem”) exposure to different irritants often occurs in
the workplace and modifies the cutaneous response, in contrast to repeated exposure to each
irritant alone, indicating a potential aggravating effect of the combination of chemically different
irritants (65,66). In several studies, the synergistic or additive effect on skin response of irritants
in combination was investigated (67). It has been demonstrated that the repeated sequential
application of occlusion (with gloves, water, or SLS) and mechanical irritation enhances the effect
on barrier disruption caused by single application (68). It was also described that concurrent
application of an anionic detergent and a mild acidic irritant can lead to disruption of the barrier
function, which, although not additive, is still considerable. The combined application of SLS
and mild acids (ascorbic and acidic acid) did not prevent SLS-induced irritation. NaOH in low
concentrations may also act as a potent irritant, but its effect is not enhanced by SLS (69). The
contact with substances that are potentially barrier disruptive, especially in combination with
other irritants, boosts the susceptibility for ICD. In contrast, exposure to low concentrations of
organic fruit acids either alone or in combination with SLS did not significantly contribute to the
development of ICD or increase susceptibility to SLS-induced irritation (70).
Changes in climatic conditions are known to influence barrier function and to induce
ICD (71–76) or to aggravate preexisting skin irritation. Sequential treatment with airflow and
SLS led to an impairment of barrier function and irritation stronger than caused by SLS alone
(76). Similar effects might occur under low humidity conditions, which are known to desiccate
skin, such as during the winter months (73,74,77,78).
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Population-based data on the incidence and prevalence of ICD are rare. The figures on the
incidence of ICD vary considerably, depending on the study population. Most data stem from
studies about occupational hand dermatoses.
Principles and Mechanisms of Skin Irritation
445

=== Page 463 ===
Coenraads and Smit reviewed international prevalence studies for eczema attributable to
all causes conducted with general populations in different countries (England, the Nether-
lands, Norway, Sweden, the United States) and found point prevalence rates of 1.7% to 6.3%,
and one- to three-year period prevalence rates of 6.2% to 10.6% (79).
An extensive study of Meding on hand eczema in Gothenburg, Sweden, included 20,000
individuals randomly selected from the population register (48). She estimated a one-year period
prevalence of hand eczema of 11% attributable to all causes, and a point prevalence of 5.4%. ICD
contributed to 35% of the cases, whereas 22% were diagnosed as atopic hand dermatitis and 19%
as ACD. In a multicenter epidemiological study on contact dermatitis in Italy by GIRDCA
(Gruppo Italiano Ricerca Dermatiti da Contatto e Ambientali), 42,839 patients with contact
dermatitis underwent patch testing. In accordance with the findings of Meding, nonoccupational
as well as occupational ICD affected women in a higher percentage compared with males
(48,49). In Heidelberg, Germany, a retrospective study of 190 cases of hand dermatitis revealed
27% as ICD, 15.8% as ACD, and the majority (40%) as being of atopic origin, and 10% micellaneous
diagnoses (80). Even still higher rates of ICD were found by Soder et al. in cleaning and kitchen
employees. One hundred and sixty-eight (79.2%) of 212 participants suffered from hand
dermatitis, and ICD with 46.2% (n ¼ 98) was the predominant diagnosis (81). A Danish study
on occupational hand eczema revealed rates of 61.9% for ICD and 21.2% for ACD (82). The
proportion of occupational ICD was similar for males and females (59.7% and 63.1%,
respectively), even though females were overrepresented in wet occupations (83). In accordance
with these findings, a retrospective epidemiological study of occupational skin disease in
Singapore over a two-year period also demonstrated that ICD is more common than ACD: ICD
made up for 62.4% of all cases of occupational contact dermatitis, ACD constituted 37.6% (84).
Interesting findings result from investigations of the severity of irritant hand dermatitis
five years after initial diagnosis (85). Fifty percent of 124 ICD cases had still medium and 32%
severe hand dermatitis demonstrating that irritant hand dermatitis is chronic in duration.
Skoet et al. found a mean disease duration of 4.4 years for males and 4.9 years for females (83).
Reports on adverse reactions to cosmetics, including those with only subjective
perceptions without morphological signs, are more frequent than assumed. In a questionnaire
carried out in Thuringia, eastern Germany, even 36% of 208 persons reported adverse
cutaneous reactions against cosmetics, 75% of them being female (86). Adverse reactions to
cosmetics and hygiene products occur predominantly in females (87). Clinical examinations
have revealed that the majority of self-reported reactions are of irritant type (88,89). Most
untoward reactions caused by cosmetics occur on the face, including the periorbital area (90).
In a study by Broeckx et al., 5.9% of a test population of 5202 patients with possible
contact dermatitis had adverse reactions to cosmetics. Patch testing classified only 1.46% as
irritant reactions, whereas 3.0% could be classified as ACD. More than 50% of the cases of
irritation were attributable to soaps and shampoos (91). In Sweden, the top-ranking products
causing adverse effects, as reported by the Swedish Medical Products Agency, were
moisturizers, hair care products, and nail products (87). In a Danish population survey with
persons aged 19 to 80 years asked for self-diagnosed dermatitis, the reported one-year
prevalence of skin symptoms on the face (acne excluded) was 14%. Of those who reported skin
symptoms on the face, 33% also reported hypersensitivity to cosmetics (92).
In other studies, the incidence of cosmetic intolerance varied between 2.0% and 8.3%,
depending on the test population (90,93,94). In a large multicenter prospective study on
reactions caused by cosmetics, Eiermann et al. found irritancy to account for only 16% of 487
cases of contact dermatitis caused by cosmetics. Of 8093 patients tested for contact dermatitis,
487 cases (6%) were diagnosed as contact dermatitis caused by cosmetics (95). Since most
consumers just stop using cosmetics and hygiene products when experiencing mild irritant or
adverse reactions and seldom consult a physician, it can be assumed that mild irritant
reactions to cosmetic products are still underestimated (92,96).
The symptoms of discomfort such as stinging, burning, itching noticed by many persons
following product applications are summarized in the term “sensitive skin.” Only little
epidemiological evidence exists with respect to its prevalence. In 2001, Willis et al. (97)
published an epidemiological study in the United Kingdom to assess the prevalence of
sensitive skin in the population and to examine possible factors that may be associated with
sensitive skin. They found that sensitive skin is a common phenomenon with about 50% of
women and 40% of men regarding themselves as having a sensitive skin. 10% of women and
446
Schliemann et al.

=== Page 464 ===
5.8% of men described themselves as having very sensitive skin. Jourdain et al. (98) reported
that 52% of women aged between 18 and 45 years agreed with the statement: “I have a
sensitive facial skin.” Approximately 30% of the total population strongly agreed with this
statement.
CLINICAL TYPES OF ICD
According to the highly variable clinical picture, several different forms of ICD have been
defined. The following types of irritation have been described (15,99):
l Acute ICD
l Delayed acute ICD
l Irritant reaction
l Cumulative ICD
l Traumiterative ICD
l Exsiccation eczematid
l Traumatic ICD
l Pustular and acneiform ICD
l Nonerythematous
l Sensory irritation
Acute ICD
Acute ICD is caused by contact to a potent irritant. Substances that cause necrosis are called
corrosive and include acids and alkaline solutions. Contact is often accidental at the workplace.
Cosmetics are unlikely to cause this type of ICD because they do not contain primary irritants
in sufficient concentrations.
Symptoms and clinical signs of acute ICD develop with a short delay of minutes to hours
after exposure, depending on the type of irritant, concentration, and intensity of contact.
Characteristically, the reaction quickly reaches its peak and then starts to heal; this is called
“decrescendo phenomenon.” Symptoms include burning rather than itching, stinging, and
soreness of the skin and are accompanied by clinical signs such as erythema, edema, bullae,
and even necrosis. Lesions are usually restricted to the area that came into contact, and sharply
demarcated borders are an important sign of acute ICD. Nevertheless, clinical appearance of
acute ICD can be highly variable and sometimes may even be indistinguishable from the
allergic type. In particular, combination of ICD and ACD can be troublesome. Prognosis of
acute ICD is good if irritant contact is avoided.
Delayed Acute ICD
For some chemicals, such as anthralin, it is typical to produce a delayed acute ICD. Visible
inflammation is not seen until 8 to 24 hours or more after exposure (100). Clinical picture and
symptoms are similar to acute ICD. Other substances that cause delayed acute ICD include
dithranol, tretinoin, and benzalkonium chloride. Irritation to tretinoin can develop after a few
days and result in a mild to fiery redness followed by desquamation, or large flakes of stratum
corneum accompanied by burning rather than itching. Irritant patch-test reactions to
benzalkonium chloride may be papular and increase with time, thus resembling allergic
patch-test reactions (101). Tetraethylene glycol diacrylate caused delayed skin irritation after
12 to 36 hours in several workers in a plant manufacturing acrylated chemicals (102).
Irritant Reaction
Irritants may produce cutaneous reactions that do not meet the clinical definition of
“dermatitis.” An irritant reaction is therefore a subclinical form of irritant dermatitis and is
characterized by a monomorphic rather than polymorphic picture. This may include one or
more of the following clinical signs: dryness, scaling, redness, vesicles, pustules, and erosions
(103). Irritant reactions often occur after intense water contact and in individuals exposed to
wet work, such as hairdressers or metal workers, particularly during their first months of
training. It often starts under rings worn on the finger or in the interdigital area, and may
Principles and Mechanisms of Skin Irritation
447

=== Page 465 ===
spread over the dorsum of the fingers and to the hands and forearms. Frequently, the
condition heals spontaneously, resulting in hardening of the skin, but it can progress to
cumulative ICD in some cases.
Cumulative ICD
Cumulative ICD is the most common type of ICD (99). In contrast to acute ICD that can be caused
by single contact to a potent irritant, cumulative ICD is the result of multiple subthreshold damage
to the skin when time is too short for restoration of skin-barrier function (104). Clinical symptoms
develop after the damage has exceeded a certain manifestation threshold, which is individually
determined and can vary within one individual at different times. Typically, cumulative ICD
is linked to exposure of several weak irritants and water contact rather than to repeated
exposure to a single potent irritant. Because the link between exposure and disease is often
not obvious to the patient, diagnosis may be considerably delayed, and it is important to
rule out an allergic cause. Symptoms include itching and pain caused by cracking of the
hyperkeratotic skin. The clinical picture is dominated by dryness, erythema, lichenification,
hyperkeratosis, and chapping. Xerotic dermatitis is the most frequent type of cumulative toxic
dermatitis (105). Vesicles are less frequent in comparison to allergic and atopic types (48);
however, diagnosis is often complicated by the combination of irritation and atopy, irritation
and allergy, or even all three. Lesions are less sharply demarcated in contrast to acute ICD.
Prognosis of chronic cumulative ICD is rather doubtful (47,83,85,106–108). Some
investigators suggest that the repair capacity of the skin may enter a self-perpetuating cycle (104).
Traumiterative ICD
The term “traumiterative ICD” has often been used similarly to cumulative ICD in the past
(99,103). Clinically, the two types are very similar as well. According to Malten and den Arend,
traumiterative ICD is a result of too-early repetition of just one type of load, whereas
cumulative ICD results from too-early repetition of different types of exposures (3).
Exsiccation Eczematid
Exsiccation eczematid is a subtype of ICD that mainly develops on the extremities. It is often
attributable to frequent bathing and showering as well as extensive use of soaps and cleansing
products. It often affects elderly people with low sebum levels of the stratum corneum. Low
humidity during the winter months and failure to remoisturize the skin contribute to the
condition. The clinical picture is typical, with dryness, ichthyosiform scaling, and fissuring.
Patients often suffer from intense itching.
Traumatic ICD
Traumatic ICD may develop after acute skin traumas such as bums, lacerations, and acute ICD.
The skin does not heal as expected, but ICD with erythema, vesicles and/or papulovesicles,
and scaling appears. The clinical course of this rare type of ICD resembles that of nummular
dermatitis (99).
Pustular and Acneiform ICD
Pustular and acneiform ICD may result from contact to irritants such as mineral oils, tars,
greases, some metals, croton oil, and naphthalenes. Pustules are sterile and transient. The
syndrome must be considered in conditions in which acneiform lesions develop outside
typical acne age and locations. Patients with seborrhoea, macroporous skin, and prior acne
vulgaris are predisposed along with atopics.
Nonerythematous ICD
Nonerythematous ICD is an early subclinical stage of skin irritation that lacks visible
inflammation but is characterized by changes in the function of the stratum corneum that can
be measured by noninvasive bioengineering techniques (99,109).
Sensory Irritation
Sensory irritation is characterized by subjective symptoms without morphological changes.
Predisposed individuals complain of stinging, burning, tightness, itching, or even painful
sensations that occur immediately or minutes/hours after contact. Those individuals with
448
Schliemann et al.

=== Page 466 ===
hyperreactive skin often report adverse reactions to cosmetic products, with most reactions
occurring on the face. Fisher defined the term “status cosmeticus,” which describes a condition
in patients who try a lot of cosmetics and complain of being unable to tolerate any of them
(110,111). Lactic acid serves as a model irritant for diagnosis of so-called stingers when it is
applied in a 5% aqueous solution on the nasolabial fold after induction of sweating in a sauna
(111). Other chemicals that cause immediate-type stinging after seconds or minutes include
chloroform and methanol (1:1) and 95% ethanol. A number of substances that have been
systematically studied by Frosch and Kligman may also cause delayed-type stinging (111,112).
Several investigators tried to determine parameters that characterize those individuals with
“sensitive skin,”s a term that still lacks a unique definition (113,114). It could be shown that
individuals who were identified as having sensitive skin by their own assessment have altered
baseline biophysical parameters, showing decreased capacitance values, increased TEWL, and
higher pH values accompanied by lower sebum levels (114–116). Possible explanations for
hyperirritability (other than diminished barrier function) that have been discussed are
heightened neurosensory input attributable to altered nerve endings, more neurotransmitter
release, unique central information processing or slower neurotransmitter removal, enhanced
immune responsiveness, and increased sweat glands (113,117,118). It is not clear whether
having sensitive skin is an acquired or inherited condition; most probably it can be both. As in
other forms of ICD, seasonal variability in stinging with a tendency to more intense responses
during winter has been observed (119). Detailed recommendations for formulation of skin care
products for sensitive skin have been given by Draelos (113). Recent reviews on experimental
studies on the nature of sensitive skin and on host factors were published by Kligman et al.
(120) and Farage et al. (116) in 2006.
REFERENCES
1. Mathias CG, Maibach HI. Dermatotoxicology monographs I. Cutaneous irritation: factors
influencing the response to irritants. Clin Toxicol 1978; 13(3):333–346.
2. Elsner P. Skin protection in the prevention of skin diseases. Curr Probl Dermatol 2007; 34:1–10.
3. Malten KE, den Arend JA. Irritant contact dermatitis. Traumiterative and cumulative impairment by
cosmetics, climate, and other daily loads. Derm Beruf Umwelt 1985; 33(4):125–132.
4. Dooms-Goossens AE, Debusschere KM, Gevers DM, et al. Contact dermatitis caused by airborne
agents. A review and case reports. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(1):1–10.
5. Lachapelle JM. Industrial airborne irritant or allergic contact dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1986;
14(3):137–145.
6. Lensen G, Jungbauer F, Gonc¸alo M, et al. Airborne irritant contact dermatitis and conjunctivitis after
occupational exposure to chlorothalonil in textiles. Contact Dermatitis 2007; 57(3):181–186.
7. Brand CU, Hunziker T, Braathen LR. Studies on human skin lymph containing Langerhans cells
from sodium lauryl sulphate contact dermatitis. J Invest Dermatol 1992; 99(5):109S–110S.
8. Brand CU, Hunziker T, Limat A, et al. Large increase of Langerhans cells in human skin lymph
derived from irritant contact dermatitis. Br J Dermatol 1993; 128(2):184–188.
9. Medenica M, Rostenberg A Jr. A comparative light and electron microscopic study of primary
irritant contact dermatitis and allergic contact dermatitis. J Invest Dermatol 1971; 56(4):259–271.
10. Brasch J, Burgard J, Sterry W. Common pathogenetic pathways in allergic and irritant contact
dermatitis. J Invest Dermatol 1992; 98(2):166–170.
11. Cohen LM, Skopicki DK, Harrist TJ, et al. Noninfectious vesiculobullous and vesiculo-pustular
diseases. In: Eider D, et al., eds. Lever’s Histopathology of the Skin. Lippincott-Raven: Philadelphia,
1997:209–252.
12. Le TK, Schalkwijk J, van de Kerkhof PC, et al. A histological and immunohistochemical study on
chronic irritant contact dermatitis. Am J Contact Dermat 1998; 9(1):23–28.
13. Corsini E, Galli CL. Epidermal cytokines in experimental contact dermatitis. Toxicology 2000; 142(3):
203–211.
14. Astner S, Gonzalez S, Gonzalez E. Noninvasive evaluation of allergic and irritant contact dermatitis
by in vivo reflectance confocal microscopy. Dermatitis 2006; 17(4):182–191.
15. Berardesca E, Distante F. Mechanisms of skin irritation. In: Elsner P, Maibach H, eds. Irritant
Dermatitis. New Clinical and Experimental Aspects. Basel: Karger, 1995:1–8.
16. Meller S, Lauerma AI, Kopp FM, et al. Chemokine responses distinguish chemical-induced allergic
from irritant skin inflammation: memory T cells make the difference. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;
119(6):1470–1480. [Epub 2007 Mar 2].
Principles and Mechanisms of Skin Irritation
449

=== Page 467 ===
17. Nickoloff BJ, Naidu Y. Perturbation of epidermal barrier function correlates with initiation of
cytokine cascade in human skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994; 30(4):535–546.
18. Willis CM, Stephens CJ, Wilkinson JD. Epidermal damage induced by irritants in man: a light and
electron microscopic study. J Invest Dermatol 1989; 93(5):695–699.
19. Astner S, Gonza´lez E, Cheung AC, et al. Non-invasive evaluation of the kinetics of allergic and
irritant contact dermatitis. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 124(2):351–359.
20. Welss T, Basketter DA, Schroder KR. In vitro skin irritation: facts and future. State of the art review
of mechanisms and models. Toxicol In Vitro 2004; 18(3):231–243.
21. Boxman IL, Ruwhof C, Boerman OC, et al. Role of fibroblasts in the regulation of proinflammatory
interleukin IL-1, IL-6 and IL-8 levels induced by keratinocyte-derived IL-1. Arch Dermatol Res 1996;
288(7):391–398.
22. Lisby S, Baadsgaard O. Mechanisms of irritant contact dermatitis. In: Rycroft R, et al., eds. Textbook
of Contact Dermatitis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2001:93–106.
23. Steinhoff M, Luger T. The skin cytokine network. In: Bos J, ed. Skin Immune System (SIS): Cutaneous
Immunology and Clinical Immunodermatology. Boca Raton: CRC Press LLC, 2004:350–365.
24. Elias PM, Wood LC, Feingold KR. Epidermal pathogenesis of inflammatory dermatoses. Am J
Contact Dermat 1999; 10(3):119–126.
25. Levin CY, Maibach HI. Irritant contact dermatitis: is there an immunologic component? Int
Immunopharmacol 2002; 2(2–3):183–189.
26. Jung K, Imhof BA, Linse R, et al. Adhesion molecules in atopic dermatitis: upregulation of alpha6
integrin expression in spontaneous lesional skin as well as in atopen, antigen and irritative induced
patch test reactions. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 1997; 113(4):495–504.
27. Corsini E, Galli CL. Cytokines and irritant contact dermatitis. Toxicol Lett 1998; 102–103:277–282.
28. Flier J, Boorsma DM, Bruynzeel DP, et al. The CXCR3 activating chemokines IP-10, Mig, and IP-9 are
expressed in allergic but not in irritant patch test reactions. J Invest Dermatol 1999; 113(4):574–578.
29. Kalish R. T cells and other leukocytes as mediators of irritant contact dermatitis. In: Beltrani V, ed.
Immunology and Allergy Clinics of North America. Contact Dermatitis. Irritant and Allergie.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company, 1997:407–415.
30. Hoefakker S, Caubo M, van’t Erve EH, et al. In vivo cytokine profiles in allergic and irritant contact
dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33(4):258–266.
31. Dika E, Branco N, Maibach HI. Immunologic patterns in allergic and irritant contact dermatitis:
similarities. Exog Dermatol 2004; 3:113–120.
32. Grønhøj Larsen C, Ternowitz T, Grønhøj Larsen F, et al. ETAF/interleukin-1 and epidermal lymphocyte
chemotactic factor in epidermis overlying an irritant patch test. Contact Dermatitis 1989; 20:335–340.
33. Hunziker T, Brand CU, Kapp A, et al. Increased levels of inflammatory cytokines in human skin
lymph derived from sodium lauryl sulphate-induced contact dermatitis. Br J Dermatol 1992; 127(3):
254–257.
34. De Jongh CM, Verberk MM, Withagen CE, et al. Stratum corneum cytokines and skin irritation
response to sodium lauryl sulfate. Contact Dermatitis 2006; 54(6):325–333.
35. Grubauer G, Elias PM, Feingold KR. Transepidermal water loss: the signal for recovery of barrier
structure and function. J Lipid Res 1989; 30(3):323–333.
36. Fartasch M, Schnetz E, Diepgen TL. Characterization of detergent-induced barrier alterations—effect
of barrier cream on irritation. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 1998; 3(2):121–127.
37. Proksch E, Holleran WM, Menon GK, et al. Barrier function regulates epidermal lipid and DNA
synthesis. Br J Dermatol 1993; 128(5):473–482.
38. Proksch E. [Regulation of the epidermal permeability barrier by lipids and hyperproliferation].
Hautarzt 1992; 43(6):331–338.
39. Heinemann C, Paschold C, Fluhr J, et al. Induction of a hardening phenomenon by repeated
application of SLS: analysis of lipid changes in the stratum corneum. Acta Derm Venereol 2005; 85(4):
290–295.
40. Fisher LB, Maibach HI. Effect of some irritants on human epidermal mitosis. Contact Dermatitis
1975; 1(5):273–276.
41. Wilhelm KP, Saunders JC, Maibach HI. Increased stratum corneum turnover induced by subclinical
irritant dermatitis. Br J Dermatol 1990; 122(6):793–798.
42. Wood LC, Jackson SM, Elias PM, et al. Cutaneous barrier perturbation stimulates cytokine
production in the epidermis of mice. J Clin Invest 1992; 90(2):482–487.
43. Grangsjo A, Leijon-Kuligowski A, To¨rma¨ H, et al. Different pathways in irritant contact eczema?
Early differences in the epidermal elemental content and expression of cytokines after application of
2 different irritants. Contact Dermatitis 1996; 35(6):355–360.
44. Forsey RJ, Shahidullah H, Sands C, et al. Epidermal Langerhans cell apoptosis is induced in vivo by
nonanoic acid but not by sodium lauryl sulphate. Br J Dermatol 1998; 139(3):453–461.
45. Ma C, Li LF, Zhang BX. Metallothionein I and II gene knock-out mice exhibit reduced tolerance to
24-h sodium lauryl sulphate patch testing. Clin Exp Dermatol 2007; 32(4):417–422.
450
Schliemann et al.

=== Page 468 ===
46. Bjornberg A. Skin reactions to primary irritants in men and women. Acta Derm Venereol 1975; 55(3):
191–194.
47. Hogan DJ, Dannaker CJ, Maibach HI. The prognosis of contact dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol
1990; 23(2 pt 1):300–307.
48. Meding B. Epidemiology of hand eczema in an industrial city. Acta Derm Venereol Suppl (Stockh)
1990; 153:1–43.
49. Sertoli A, Francalanci S, Acciai MC, et al. Epidemiological survey of contact dermatitis in Italy
(1984–1993) by GIRDCA (Gruppo Italiano Ricerca Dermatiti da Contatto e Ambientali). Am J Contact
Dermat 1999; 10(1):18–30.
50. Nilsson E. Individual and environmental risk factors for hand eczema in hospital workers. Acta
Derm Venereol Suppl (Stockh) 1986; 128:1–63.
51. Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Factors predisposing to cutaneous irritation. Dermatol Clin 1990; 8(1):
17–22.
52. Coenraads PJ, Diepgen TL. Risk for hand eczema in employees with past or present atopic
dermatitis. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 1998; 71(1):7–13.
53. Berndt U, Hinnen U, Iliev D, et al. Role of the atopy score and of single atopic features as risk factors
for the development of hand eczema in trainee metal workers. Br J Dermatol 1999; 140(5):922–924.
54. Dickel H, Bruckner TM, Schmidt A, et al. Impact of atopic skin diathesis on occupational skin
disease incidence in a working population. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 121(1):37–40.
55. Basketter DA, Miettinen J, Lahti A. Acute irritant reactivity to sodium lauryl sulfate in atopics and
non-atopics. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38(5):253–257.
56. Gallacher G, Maibach HI. Is atopic dermatitis a predisposing factor for experimental acute irritant
contact dermatitis? Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38(1):1–4.
57. Rystedt I. Work-related hand eczema in atopics. Contact Dermatitis 1985; 12(3):164–171.
58. Suter-Widmer J, Elsner P. Age and irritation. In: van der Valk PGM, Maibach HI, eds. The Irritant
Contact Dermatitis Syndrome. CRC Press: Boca Raton, 1994:257–261.
59. Schwindt DA, Wilhelm KP, Miller DL, et al. Cumulative irritation in older and younger skin: a
comparison. Acta Derm Venereol 1998; 78(4):279–283.
60. Lammintausta K, Maibach HI, Wilson D. Susceptibility to cumulative and acute irritant dermatitis.
An experimental approach in human volunteers. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 19(2):84–90.
61. Maibach H, Berardesca E. Racial and skin color differences in skin sensitivity: implications for skin
care products. Cosmet Toilet 1990; 105:35–36.
62. Astner S, Burnett N, Rius-Dı´az F, et al. Irritant contact dermatitis induced by a common household
irritant: a noninvasive evaluation of ethnic variability in skin response. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006;
54(3):458–465.
63. Peters L, Marriott M, Mukerji B, et al. The effect of population diversity on skin irritation. Contact
Dermatitis 2006; 55(6):357–363.
64. Dahl MV. Chronic, irritant contact dermatitis: mechanisms, variables, and differentiation from other
forms of contact dermatitis. Adv Dermatol 1988; 3:261–275.
65. Wigger-Alberti W, Krebs A, Elsner P. Experimental irritant contact dermatitis due to cumulative
epicutaneous exposure to sodium lauryl sulphate and toluene: single and concurrent application.
Br J Dermatol 2000; 143(3):551–556.
66. Wigger-Alberti W, Spoo J, Schliemann-Willers S, et al. The tandem repeated irritation test: a new
method to assess prevention of irritant combination damage to the skin. Acta Derm Venereol 2002;
82(2):94–97.
67. Kartono F, Maibach HI. Irritants in combination with a synergistic or additive effect on the skin
response: an overview of tandem irritation studies. Contact Dermatitis 2006; 54(6):303–312.
68. Fluhr JW, Akengin A, Bornkessel A, et al. Additive impairment of the barrier function by mechanical
irritation, occlusion and sodium lauryl sulphate in vivo. Br J Dermatol 2005; 153(1):125–131.
69. Fluhr JW, Bankova L, Fuchs S, et al. Fruit acids and sodium hydroxide in the food industry and their
combined effect with sodium lauryl sulphate: controlled in vivo tandem irritation study. Br J
Dermatol 2004; 151(5):1039–1048.
70. Schliemann-Willers S, Fuchs S, Kleesz P, et al. Fruit acids do not enhance sodium lauryl sulphate-
induced cumulative irritant contact dermatitis in vivo. Acta Derm Venereol 2005; 85(3):206–210.
71. Denda M, Sato J, Tsuchiya T, et al. Low humidity stimulates epidermal DNA synthesis and amplifies
the hyperproliferative response to barrier disruption: implication for seasonal exacerbations of
inflammatory dermatoses. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111(5):873–878.
72. Denda M. Influence of dry environment on epidermal function. J Dermatol Sci 2000; 24(suppl 1):
S22–S28.
73. Rycroft RJ. Occupational dermatoses from warm dry air. Br J Dermatol 1981; 105(suppl 21):29–34.
74. Veien NK, Hattel T, Laurberg G. Low-humidity dermatosis from car heaters. Contact Dermatitis
1997; 37(3):138.
Principles and Mechanisms of Skin Irritation
451

=== Page 469 ===
75. Morris-Jones R, Robertson SJ, Ross JS, et al. Dermatitis caused by physical irritants. Br J Dermatol
2002; 147(2):270–275.
76. Fluhr JW, Praessler J, Akengin A, et al. Air flow at different temperatures increases sodium lauryl
sulphate-induced barrier disruption and irritation in vivo. Br J Dermatol 2005; 152(6):1228–1234.
77. Mozzanica N. Pathogenetic aspects of allergic and irritant contact dermatitis. Clin Dermatol 1992;
10(2):115–121.
78. Uter W, Gefeller O, Schwanitz HJ. An epidemiological study of the influence of season (cold and dry
air) on the occurrence of irritant skin changes of the hands. Br J Dermatol 1998; 138(2):266–272.
79. Coenraads P, Smit J. Epidemiology. In: Rycroft R, Menne T, Frosch P, eds. Textbook of Contact
Dermatitis. Springer: Berlin, 1995:133–150.
80. Ku¨hner-Piplack B. Klinik und Differentialdiagnose des Handekzems. Eine retrospektive Studie am
Krankengut der Universita¨ts-Hautklinik Heidelberg. Heidelberg, Germany: Ruprecht-Karls-University,
1982–1985.
81. Soder S, Diepgen TL, Radulescu M, et al. Occupational skin diseases in cleaning and kitchen
employees: course and quality of life after measures of secondary individual prevention. J Dtsch
Dermatol Ges 2007; 5(8):670–676.
82. Cvetkovski RS, Rothman KJ, Olsen J, et al. Relation between diagnoses on severity, sick leave and
loss of job among patients with occupational hand eczema. Br J Dermatol 2005; 152(1):93–98.
83. Skoet R, Olsen J, Mathiesen B, et al. A survey of occupational hand eczema in Denmark. Contact
Dermatitis 2004; 51(4):159–166.
84. Lim YL, Goon A. Occupational skin diseases in Singapore 2003–2004: an epidemiologic update.
Contact Dermatitis 2007; 56(3):157–159.
85. Jungbauer FH, van der Vleuten P, Groothoff JW, et al. Irritant hand dermatitis: severity of disease,
occupational exposure to skin irritants and preventive measures 5 years after initial diagnosis.
Contact Dermatitis 2004; 50(4):245–251.
86. Ro¨pcke F. Auswertung zur Umfrage Epidemiologie von Kosmetika-Unvertra¨glichkeiten—eine
bevo¨lkerungsbasierte Studie. 1999.
87. Berne B, Bostro¨m A, Grahne´n AF, et al. Adverse effects of cosmetics and toiletries reported to the
Swedish Medical Products Agency 1989–1994. Contact Dermatitis 1996; 34(5):359–362.
88. Berne B, Lundin A, Malmros IE. Side effects of cosmetics and toiletries in relation to use.
A retrospective study in a Swedish population. Eur J Dermatol 1994; 4:189–193.
89. de Groot AC, Beverdam EG, Ayong CT, et al. The role of contact allergy in the spectrum of adverse
effects caused by cosmetics and toiletries. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 19:195–201.
90. Adams RM, Maibach HI. A five-year study of cosmetic reactions. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 13(6):
1062–1069.
91. Broeckx W, Blondeel A, Dooms-Goossens A, et al. Cosmetic intolerance. Contact Dermatitis 1987;
16(4):189–194.
92. Meding B, Liden C, Berglind N. Self-diagnosed dermatitis in adults. Results from a population
survey in Stockholm. Contact Dermatitis 2001; 45(6):341–345.
93. Skog E. Incidence of cosmetic dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1980; 6(7):449–451.
94. Romaguera C, Camarasa JM, Alomar A, et al. Patch tests with allergens related to cosmetics. Contact
Dermatitis 1983; 9(2):167–168.
95. Eiermann HJ, Larsen W, Maibach HI, et al. Prospective study of cosmetic reactions: 1977-1980. North
American Contact Dermatitis Group. J Am Acad Dermatol 1982; 6(5):909–917.
96. Amin S, Engasser P, Maibach H. Adverse cosmetic reactions. In: Baran R, Maibach H, eds. Textbook
of Cosmetic Dermatology. London: Martin Dunitz Ltd, 1998:709–746.
97. Willis CM, Shaw S, De Lacharrie`re O, et al. Sensitive skin: an epidemiological study. Br J Dermatol
2001; 145(2):258–263.
98. Jourdain R, de Lacharrie`re O, Bastien P, et al. Ethnic variations in self-perceived sensitive skin:
epidemiological survey. Contact Dermatitis 2002; 46(3):162–169.
99. Lammintausta K, Maibach H. Contact dermatitis due to irritation: General principles, etiology, and
histology. In: Adams R, ed. Occupational Skin Disease. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company,
1990:1–15.
100. Malten KE, den Arend JA, Wiggers RE. Delayed irritation: hexanediol diacrylate and butanediol
diacrylate. Contact Dermatitis 1979; 5(3):178–184.
101. Bruynzeel DP, van Ketel WG, Scheper RJ, et al. Delayed time course of irritation by sodium lauryl
sulfate: observations on threshold reactions. Contact Dermatitis 1982; 8(4):236–239.
102. Nethercott JR, Gupta S, Rosen C, et al. Tetraethylene glycol diacrylate. A cause of delayed cutaneous
irritant reaction and allergic contact dermatitis. J Occup Med 1984; 26(7):513–516.
103. Frosch P. Cutaneous irritation. In: Rycroft R, Menne T, Frosch P, eds. Textbook of Contact
Dermatitis. Springer: Berlin, 1995:28–61.
104. Malten KE. Thoughts on irritant contact dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1981; 7(5):238–247.
452
Schliemann et al.

=== Page 470 ===
105. Eichmann A, Amgwerd D. [Toxic contact dermatitis]. Schweiz Rundsch Med Prax 1992; 81(19):
615–617.
106. Keczkes K, Bhate SM, Wyatt EH. The outcome of primary irritant hand dermatitis. Br J Dermatol
1983; 109(6):665–668.
107. Elsner P, Baxmann F, Liehr H. Metal working fluid dermatitis: a comparative follow-up study in
patients with irritant and non-imtant dermatitis. In: Elsner P, Maibach H, eds. Irritant Dermatitis:
New Clinical and Experimental Aspects. Basel: Karger, 1995:77–86.
108. Belsito DV. Occupational contact dermatitis: etiology, prevalence, and resultant impairment/
disability. J Am Acad Dermatol 2005; 53(2):303–313.
109. van der Valk PG, Maibach HI. Do topical corticosteroids modulate skin irritation in human beings?
Assessment by transepidermal water loss and visual scoring. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989; 21(3 pt 1):
519–522.
110. Fisher A. Cosmetic actions and reactions: therapeutic, irritant and allergic. Cutis 1980; 26:22–29.
111. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. A method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied
substances. J Cosmetic Chem 1977; 28:197–209.
112. Parrish J, Pathak M, Fitzpatrick T. Facial irritation due to sunscreen products. Letter to the editor.
Arch Dermatol 1975; 111:525.
113. Draelos ZD. Sensitive skin: perceptions, evaluation, and treatment. Am J Contact Dermat 1997; 8(2):
67–78.
114. Seidenari S, Francomano M, Mantovani L. Baseline biophysical parameters in subjects with sensitive
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38(6):311–315.
115. Breternitz M, Berardesca E, Fluhr JW. Technical bases of biophysical instruments used in sensitive
skin testing. In: Berardesca E, Fluhr JW, Maibach HI, eds. Sensitive Skin Syndrome. Boca Raton:
CRC-Press, 2006.
116. Farage MA, Katsarou A, Maibach HI. Sensory, clinical and physiological factors in sensitive skin: a
review. Contact Dermatitis 2006; 55(1):1–14.
117. Muizzuddin N, Marenus KD, Maes DH. Factors defining sensitive skin and its treatment. Am J
Contact Dermat 1998; 9(3):170–175.
118. Aramaki J, Kawana S, Effendy I, et al. Differences of skin irritation between Japanese and European
women. Br J Dermatol 2002; 146(6):1052–1056.
119. Leyden J. Risk assessment of products used on skin. Am J Contact Dermat 1993; 4:158–162.
120. Kligman AM, Sadiq I, Zhen Y, et al. Experimental studies on the nature of sensitive skin. Skin Res
Technol 2006; 12(4):217–222.
Principles and Mechanisms of Skin Irritation
453

=== Page 472 ===
43
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants and
Anti-Irritantsa for Surfactant-Based Products
Marc Paye
Colgate-Palmolive R&D, Herstal, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
Each day our skin is in contact with a multitude of aggressions that we need to minimize. This
can be done by decreasing the intrinsic irritation potential of the insult, by placing an
additional barrier between the irritant and our skin, or by changing our behavior. Chemical
irritants are usually the best-known irritants that inflame our skin, but physical, biological, and
environmental factors are also important causes of irritation (Table 1)
In some cases, several irritant categories may act simultaneously on the skin to potentiate
their effect. For instance, scrubbing products involve a mechanical stress of the skin by rubbing
the skin with solid particles and a chemical stress by the surfactants used to formulate the
vehicle. With so many types of potential irritants, it is obvious that skin irritation can be
induced through different pathways.
SURFACTANTS
Surfactants: A Good Model to Investigate Skin Irritation
Surfactants are frequently used as a model to investigate skin irritation and the effect of anti-
irritants for three main reasons.
Surfactants are a Major Cause of Skin Irritation
As a result of their detergent and foaming properties, surfactants find broad use in many
domestic products that contact the skin (Table 2). Furthermore, many subjects take several
showers/baths a day for cleansing as well as for relaxation and pleasure.
It is Quite Easy to Obtain Very Well-Standardized Surfactants to Work With
In the scientific literature, sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) is regularly used as the “gold” standard
to induce skin irritation (18) for several reasons:
l SLS is classified as a skin irritant, Xi-R38 (19).
l SLS can be obtained in a very pure form, which allows different laboratories to work
on the same material.
l SLS can be easily formulated in various vehicles.
l Allergic reactions to SLS are not common, although a few cases have been reported
(20).
l The level of induced irritation can be controlled by adjusting the concentration (21,22).
l Any skin damage is rapidly reversible.
Unlike Other Irritants, Surfactants May Induce Irritation Through Several Pathways
Because of their structure and physicochemical properties, surfactants interact with various
targets of the skin: constitutive and functional proteins, intercellular or cell membrane lipids,
and living cells.
aThe term ‘anti-irritant’ is used to express a reduction of the irritation potential; it does not mean a total suppression of skin
irritation.

=== Page 473 ===
Surfactant Behavior in Solution: Their Physicochemical Properties
Surfactants are amphiphilic molecules, meaning that they contain two opposing parts: hydrophilic
(water-loving) and hydrophobic (water-hating). When dissolved in water, the former is readily
hydrated while the latter avoids water. As a surfactant is added to water, it concentrates as
independent molecules (called monomers) at the air/water interface with the hydrophobic part
trying to avoid the water environment. At a certain concentration, called the “critical micellar
concentration” (CMC), the surfactant can no longer concentrate at the surface and goes into the
bulk of the solution. In order to avoid contact with water, the hydrophobic part of the surfactant
molecules tends to aggregate together into larger particles called “micelles” (23) (Fig. 1). However,
the hydrophilic part of the surfactant either by repulsive forces between similar charges (for
anionic or cationic surfactants) or by trying to interact better with water (all surfactant types) tends
to work to disaggregate the micelles. On the basis of those attractive and repulsive forces, micelles
are dynamic structures that continuously form and disrupt to define an overall relative proportion
Table 1
Examples of Potential Skin Irritants
Chemicals
Surfactants (1), solvents (2,3), acids and alkalis (3), dessicants (4), concentrated salt solutions (5), alcohol (6),
oils (7), water in wet work conditions (8)
Environmental conditions
Extreme weather conditions [very warm, very cold, dry atmosphere (9), UV radiations or pollution (10)]
Physicals
Abrasives (11), occlusion (12) needles (13), burns (14), rubbing (15)
Biological factors
Some enzymes or combination of enzymes (16), some plants (17)
Table 2
Surfactant-Containing Products
Cosmetics and toiletries
Body-cleansing liquids (shower gels, facial cleansers, liquid soaps, foam baths)
Body-cleansing solids (soap bars, syndet bars, combars)
Shampoos
Shaving products
Toothpastes
Deodorants
Household products
All purpose cleaners
Windows cleaners
Hand dishwashing liquids
Automatic dishwashing products
Fabric detergents
Fabric softeners
Figure 1
Surfactant behavior in solution. (A) Surfactant molecules in aqueous solution concentrate at the air–
water interface with the hydrophobic part oriented toward the air side. (B) When the concentration of surfactant
increases, the interface becomes saturated with surfactant molecules that penetrate into the solution. (C) To
minimize their interaction with water, the hydrophobic parts of the surfactants interact together and form micelles in
solution. These latter are unstable structures that form and disaggregate to establish a balance between
monomers and micelles in the solution.
456
Paye

=== Page 474 ===
of monomers and of micelles in the bulk. As a consequence, any system that is able to stabilize the
micelles or facilitate the incorporation of free monomers into the micelles will reduce the relative
proportion of monomers in the solution (24).
MECHANISM OF INTERACTION BETWEEN SURFACTANTS AND THE SKIN
When surfactants come into contact with the skin, they can interact with it in different ways (25):
l By binding to the surface proteins of the skin
l By denaturing skin surface proteins
l By solubilizing or disorganizing the intercellular lipids of the skin
l By penetrating through the epidermal lipid barrier
l By interacting with living cells
All these interactions may lead to irritation. Whatever the mechanism of interaction
between the surfactant and the skin, the free monomeric form will be the key driver to initiate
irritation as illustrated hereafter.
Interactions with Skin Proteins
Binding of surfactant to isolated stratum corneum (SC), the most external layer of the skin,
saturates at or near the CMC (26), which is consistent with the fact that only monomers of
surfactants can adsorb to the proteins of the skin (27). After binding to the proteins, surfactants
cause the proteins to denature, leading to a swelling of the SC (28). Rhein et al. (29)
investigated the swelling of isolated SC when exposed to various single surfactant solutions
and showed that the swelling was concentration and time dependent up to the CMC before
leveling off. The authors interpreted their results as support for a single interaction between
the surfactant monomer and skin proteins.
Denaturation of functional proteins and especially enzymes have multiple consequences
such as impaired desquamation process, maturation of lipids and proteins in the epidermis,
defense system against free radicals, and enhancement of oxidative stress (30,31).
However, even if the interaction of surfactants with skin surface proteins is related to the
CMC of the surfactants or surfactant mixtures, above the CMC there is no more a direct
relationship. For surfactants mixtures, it is proposed that above the CMC the affinity of
individual surfactants for skin surface proteins also plays a critical role on skin irritation (32).
Interaction with the Intercellular Skin Lipids
The protective lipidic barrier of the skin is composed of highly organized lipid layers located
between the cells of the SC. In order to disorganize these lipids and alter the skin barrier function,
surfactants have to integrate into the lipidic layers that are mostly hydrophobic. Because of their
small size, monomers of surfactants can easily reach the intercellular lipids and disturb the skin
barrier function, making such an effect depending on the relative proportion of monomers in
solution. However, it has been recently shown (33) that micelles formed from sodium dodecyl
sulfate (same as SLS) have a hydrodynamic radius size that is compatible with partial penetration
into the SC, and should be capable of interacting with the intercellular lipids. This would partly
explain why increasing the concentration of single SLS surfactant solutions above the CMC leads
to increased irritation. For other surfactant types, micelles have to release their monomers to
interact with the lipidic barrier. The dose-related level of irritation caused by such surfactants
above their CMC (34) should thus be related to another mechanism.
Interaction with Living Cells
Once the lipidic barrier has been disrupted or weakened, monomers of surfactants can reach
the living part of the epidermis and interact with the keratinocytes and Langerhans cells,
leading to the following:
l A lysis of the cells in the case of severe irritants and the release of chemical mediators
into the intercellular space
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants
457

=== Page 475 ===
l An alteration of the cellular membrane and passive diffusion of chemical mediators
from the cytoplasm into the intercellular space
l A stimulation of the cells with subsequent active release of chemical mediators into the
intercellular space or synthesis of new mediators
Whatever the pathway, these mediators will initiate a multitude of reactions at the site of
irritation such as a stimulation of cell proliferation, a stimulation of neighboring cells to
produce additional mediators, a vasodilatation of blood capillaries in the dermo-epidermal
papillae, and an attraction of blood cells. Many different chemical mediators will also be
upregulated at the site of irritation such as interleukin (IL)-1 a and b, IL-2, -6, -8, and -10,
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factors (GM-CSF), tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-a),
interferon-g, and others. This cascade of chemical messengers responsible for the inflammatory
reactions is detailed elsewhere in this book (chap. 42).
Interaction with Neuroreceptors
In sensitive persons, initial contact with some surfactants result in sensory irritation
characterized by stinging, itching, or a burning sensation. Such an early signal of irritation
was exploited a long time ago with the development of the so-called lactic acid stinging test
(35) to detect subjects with an “upper level of skin sensitivity” in the face.
This type of sensory irritation occurs when thin, unmyelinated, chemically sensitive
type-C nociceptors are activated and transmit a depolarizing signal via the dorsal root ganglia
in the spinal cord to the brain where the sensation is appreciated (36). These receptors are
extensively distributed through the dermis and the epidermis allowing excitation, even by
faint stimuli. For more intense irritants, a retro-signal is transmitted from the dorsal root
ganglia to the inflammation site and contributes to the erythematous reaction.
ANTI-IRRITANTS FOR SURFACTANT-BASED PRODUCTS
Fortunately, nowadays many systems have been developed to minimize the risks of intolerance to
cosmetics or surfactant-based products. This is extremely important because of the increased use
of toiletry products. They must be as mild as possible to the skin. Not only the mildest ingredients
are used, but also finished hygiene products often contain one or more anti-irritant systems.
Anti-Irritation by Using Only Mild Surfactants
The first approach to develop a mild, surfactant-based product is to carefully select the mildest
surfactants. Nonionic surfactants are generally considered as the mildest and are typical
ingredients in body-cleansing products for babies, for sensitive skin subjects, and for face-cleansing
products. However, several anionic surfactants are also extremely respectful of the skin condition
and are often introduced in the same categories of products. These are, for instance, highly
ethoxylated (at least 5-EO) alkyl sulfates, sulfosuccinate esters, sarcosinates, fatty acid-protein
condensate, alkyl phosphate ester, alkyl glutamate, taurates, and others. Amphoteric surfactants
are rarely used alone, but rather as secondary surfactant; thus, their intrinsic irritation potential has
no real meaning. Cationic surfactants are essentially used for their antibacterial properties rather
than their detergent properties and are often described in the literature as the most irritating
surfactants. However, like anionic surfactants, it is also possible to find very mild cationic
surfactants (e.g., salts of alkyl amine, quaternized alkyl polyglycosides). Because of their low
usage, the cationic surfactants will not be discussed in this chapter.
Anti-Irritation by an Appropriate Combination of Surfactants
The best counterirritants for surfactants are other surfactants. Several authors have clearly
demonstrated such a positive interaction between various surfactants in vitro (29,37) and in
vivo (32,38,39), with diluted (29,37,38) or with highly concentrated solutions (32,39).
Amphoteric surfactants are well known to decrease the irritation potential of anionic
surfactants (40), but nonionic surfactants can display the same effect when used at a
sufficiently high concentration. More surprisingly certain anionic surfactants can reduce the
irritation potential of another anionic surfactant, instead of cumulating their effects (39).
458
Paye

=== Page 476 ===
How Can Secondary Surfactants Reduce the Irritation Potential of Primary Surfactants: The Principle
of Surfactant Antagonism
Skin is a complex organ with different potential targets for surfactants. Several mechanisms
may, thus, occur to explain the reduced irritation observed by mixed surfactant systems as
compared with single surfactant solutions.
Overall mechanism for all targets. On the basis of the fact that mainly monomers irritate the
skin and that there is an equilibrium in solution between micelles and monomers, any factor
able to stabilize the micelles, and hence decrease the relative proportion of monomers, plays a
major role in reducing irritation (24). This is the case for secondary surfactants added to the
system as explained in Figure 2, but also for other kinds of macromolecules such as proteins or
other polymers (41).
As shown in Figure 2, any kind of secondary surfactant is able to stabilize the micelles
and reduce the relative amount of irritant monomers in the solution.
Furthermore, in the case of mixed micelles of types B, C, or E (Fig. 2), the overall electrical
charge density at the surface of the micelles is lowered. This effect allows the micelles to be less
repulsive to surfactant monomers in the surrounding bulk, thus allowing the monomers to
more easily incorporate into an ever-expanding micelle. This mechanism explains the
reduction in the amount of free monomers in the solution.
Additional mechanism for interactions with surface proteins. The affinity of the monomers
for proteins may also displace the monomer–micelle equilibrium. This affinity depends on the
intrinsic properties of the surfactant (e.g., ionic charge, tertiary structure, hydrophobic
domains, carbon chain length, level of ethoxylation) on the mobility of the monomer in the
solution (which is related to the size of the monomer), and on the availability of the protein’s
binding sites. This latter parameter is mainly significant in the case of concentrated solutions of
surfactant mixtures, because their monomers compete for binding sites on the surface proteins
as well as with interactions within the micelle. The amount of available monomers that will
bind to the protein will thus be decreased, and the irritation potential of the mixture lowered.
Such a decrease in the binding of the anionic surfactants to the skin surface has been
Figure 2
Mixed micelles of surfactants in solution. In aqueous solution, the hydrophobic tail of surfactant
monomers form self-assembled aggregates within the core of the micelle, while the hydrophilic head interacts
more with the water molecules. This structural arrangement is more energetically favorable because it reduces the
unfavorable hydrocarbon/water contact energy. (A) When micelles are formed of only one single type of
surfactants (e.g., anionic surfactants), electrostatic repulsion forces tend to disrupt the micelles that are not stable.
(B) Adding cationic surfactants into the micelles increases the size of the micelles, modifies their form, and
stabilizes the micelle by introducing attractive charges between the positive and negative polar head groups.
(C) When adding nonionic surfactants to solution A, uncharged surfactant heads incorporate into the micelles,
increasing the size of the micelles as well as the distance between the anionic polar heads. As a result of this
increased distance, the repulsive forces between the monomers are reduced, which leads to a stabilization and
change of micelle form. (D) When a second type of anionic surfactant is incorporated to solution A, the
hydrophobic tail should be different from the primary surfactant tail. Consequently, the distance between the
anionic surfactant heads is greater, repulsive forces are lower, and the micelles become more stable, are larger
and of a different form. (E) When amphoteric surfactants are added to the solution of anionic surfactants, their
behavior depends on the electronic charge of the surfactant [positive at a pH below the lowest pKa of the
surfactant (case B), negative at a pH higher than the highest pKa of the surfactant (case D), and zwitterionic at a
pH between the lowest and highest pKa of the surfactant (case E)].
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants
459

=== Page 477 ===
demonstrated by attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-
FTIR) in the presence of a secondary surfactant of any type (42).
Similarly, proteins or polymers added to a surfactant solution may also compete for the
same binding sites as the surfactant monomers at the surface of the skin and are often
counterirritants for the surfactants (42).
Additional mechanism for interactions with intercellular skin lipids. Micelles formed from
a single surfactant type are smaller than micelles formed from several surfactant types. While
the former category may have a size allowing them to partially penetrate through the SC [e.g.,
the case for SLS, (33)], the latter examples should be sterically hindered from penetrating into
the skin and interacting with the intercellular lipids (43). This effect results in a partial
protection of the skin barrier function when adding a secondary surfactant to the primary one.
Scientific Cases of Reduced Irritation in Surfactant Mixtures
Many peer-reviewed scientific publications have reported that mixtures of surfactants are less
irritating than expected by the sum of the irritation potential of each species taken separately.
Several review papers by Goldemberg (44,45), Effendy and Maibach (46), and Paye (47–49)
have illustrated examples of antagonisms between surfactants. The following section focuses
on giving additional concrete examples grouped by the type of interaction between the skin
and the surfactant investigated by the author.
Interaction of surfactant with proteins in vitro or in vivo
l Ohbu et al. (50) evaluated the protein denaturation properties of surfactants using
circular dichroism and demonstrated that the sodium dodecyl sulfate–induced
denaturation of bovine serum albumin (BSA) was counteracted by dodecyltrimethy-
lammonium chloride or by N, N’-dimethyldodecylaminoxide.
l Dominguez et al. (40), using human callus as a skin model, demonstrated a
considerable inhibition of adsorption of SLS on the callus when alkyl amido betaine
(AAB) was present in the same solution. They deduced from their data that the two
individual surfactants were more irritating than any of the combinations tested. They
explained their data by a stabilization of the micelles of mixed surfactants and hence a
reduction of bioavailable monomers.
l Miyazawa et al. (51) showed in vitro that mixed surfactants reduced protein
denaturation compared with single surfactant solutions. Again this was explained
on the basis of the reduced level of free surfactant monomers in the mixed surfactant
solution as compared with single surfactant solutions.
l Blake-Haskins et al. (52) showed, using an in vitro protein denaturation assay
(collagen swelling), that the addition of an amphoteric surfactant to an anionic
surfactant reduced the denaturation potential of the anionic surfactant.
l Paye and Jacobs (42), using attenuated total reflection–Fourier transform infrared
(ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy, demonstrated, by a study on human volunteers, that the
binding of anionic surfactants, SLS, and linear alkyl benzene sulfonate (LAS), to skin
surface proteins was significantly reduced when amphoteric or nonionic surfactants
were added in the solution. This study illustrated the competition between the two
types of monomers for the binding sites on skin surface proteins.
l Tadenuma et al. (53) showed that when alcohol ethoxylate (AE) was added to SLS, the BSA
was less denatured. The higher the concentration of AE for a fixed concentration of SLS, the
greater the inhibitory effect of AE on SLS-induced protein denaturation. By measuring the
adsorption isotherms of SLS onto agarose-immobilized BSA in the presence and absence of
AE, the authors correlated reduced protein denaturation by AE with a dramatic reduction
of binding of SLS to BSA because of the adsorption of AE onto the protein.
l Paye et al. (54), using commercial surfactants (as provided by manufacturers) and in
the exact proportions as in standard commercialized laundry detergents, demon-
strated that the protein denaturation potential (using the in vitro zein test) of the
mixtures of surfactants was in all cases lower than expected by the cumulative protein
denaturation effect measured for the surfactants separately.
460
Paye

=== Page 478 ===
Interaction of surfactant with lipids or membranes
l Charaf and Hart (55) investigated in vitro the interaction of surfactants with
membranes and demonstrated that the addition of lauryl ether sulfosuccinate to a
given concentration of SLS decreased the aggressiveness of the latter surfactant for the
membrane.
l Garcia et al. (24) demonstrated that mixtures of surfactants diffused less through a
membrane than the same surfactants tested separately. This observation was
interpreted by the fact that micelles were too big to penetrate through the membrane
and that the relative proportion of monomers was lowered in the mixed solutions.
l Kawasaki et al. (56), using the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) technique,
demonstrated an increased fluidity of the SC intercellular lipid structure after
application of a solution of SLS. This increased disordering was most likely because of
an intercalation of SLS monomers into the intercellular lipids organization. The
addition of sodium lauryl glutamate (SLG), another anionic surfactant, to SLS
inhibited the fluidization of the intercellular lipids caused by SLS alone.
l Moore et al. (43), using dynamic light scattering measurements, determined the size of
the hydrodynamic radius for SLS micelles that was compatible with partial penetration
inside the SC, while the size of the mixed micelles from SLS and dodecyl hexa(ethylene
oxide) (C12E6) was higher and hindered the penetration of the mixed micelles inside
the SC. They confirmed their hypothesis by measuring the hydrodynamic radius of
surfactants evaluated in skin penetration studies and showed that the addition of
C12E6 to the SLS solutions was found to decrease the amount of SLS penetrating into
the epidermis. They attributed this decreased penetration to two causes: a decrease in
the concentration of SLS monomers because of a stabilization of the micelles and a
decreased penetration of the mixed micelles because of an increase in their steric size.
Interaction of surfactants with living cells in vitro
l Earl et al. (57) showed in a three-dimensional cell culture model of human skin that
equal mixtures of SLS and N,N-dimethyl-N-dodecylaminobetaine have reduced
cytotoxicity potential compared with their single applications at the same concen-
trations. Their observation correlated well with the results of a four-hour human patch
study in which the same single surfactants were tested versus the surfactant
combinations at high concentrations.
l Benassi et al. (58), using cell culture models, demonstrated that the cytotoxic effect of SLS
was reduced when it associated with different tensides such as cocamidopropyl betaine,
polysorbate-20, and polysorbate-80. They compared their results to previous data
showing that the barrier damage caused by SLS in vivo was lower when SLS was used in
combination with other tensides because they were able to reduce the CMC of SLS.
Interaction of diluted surfactant solutions with skin in vivo
l Rhein et al. (59) used in vivo skin irritation studies (21-day cumulative irritation test) to
show that the addition of (C12-C14) alkyl, 7-ethoxy sulfate (AEOS-7EO) to a constant dose
of SLS resulted in a significant reduction of erythema, hence producing a milder system.
l Marti (60), using four in vitro and two in vivo models for skin and mucous membrane
irritation prediction, showed that the irritation potential of sodium lauryl ether sulfate
used as a primary surfactant could be significantly decreased by adding cocamido-
propyl betaine, or coco amphocarboxypropylate, or protein fatty acid condensate as
secondary tensides for mildness synergy in shampoo formulations.
l Zenhder et al. (61) evaluated the effect of sodium laureth carboxylate with two
different levels of ethoxylation (5 and 13 ethoxylations) for their effectiveness in
reducing the irritation potential of SLS in a five-day human patch test. Both
carboxylates were counterirritants to SLS as shown by clinical examinations,
measurements of superficial blood flow, skin barrier alterations, and skin electrical
conductance.
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants
461

=== Page 479 ===
l Lee et al. (38), in a 24-hour patch test, showed that adding SLG to a solution of SLS
decreased the irritation potential of the latter.
l Teglia and Secchi (62), using a three-week arm-soaking test on human volunteers,
showed that the amphoteric surfactant, cocamidopropyl betaine, had a similar anti-
irritant effect versus wheat protein when added to a solution of SLS. Both the wheat
protein and cocamidopropyl betaine protected the skin against alteration of the skin
barrier and subsequent irritation.
l Teglia and Secchi (41) reported that using SLS, sodium laureth sulfate (SLES), and
olefin sulfonate as primary surfactants, and obtaining some new formulations by
mixing these primary surfactants with four different auxiliary surfactants and protein
hydrolyzates, reduced the damage to the SC.
l Paye and Cartiaux (63) showed in a short-term patch test on human volunteers that
alkyl betaine (amphoteric surfactant) and AE (nonionic surfactant) reduced the
alteration of the SC caused by SLS or by LAS (anionic surfactants).
l McFadden et al. (64) mentioned in one of their publications that they had run an
unpublished clinical study demonstrating that the direct addition of benzalkonium
chloride (BC) to a solution of SLS reduced the irritant inflammatory response of the
volunteers to SLS. They explained their observation by a stabilization of the mixed
micelles by BC.
l Vilaplana et al. (65) emphasized the importance of the physicochemical behavior of
surfactants in solution as a way of minimizing their irritant properties. In a 48-hour
patch test on human volunteers, the authors showed that the addition of disodium
cocoyl glutamate or of sodium PEG-4 lauramide carboxylate to a solution of SLS
produced a significant reduction in the transepidermal water loss (TEWL), skin color
reflectance, and laser Doppler velocimetry, even though there was a two-time increase
in the total surfactant concentration.
Interaction of concentrated surfactant preparations with skin in vivo
l Dillarstone and Paye (39), using the four-hour human patch test with concentrated
surfactant systems, demonstrated that the addition of 10% of the following surfactants:
cocoamidopropylbetaine, ethanolamide, SLES, or AE to a solution of 20% SLS, or of
LAS decreased in all cases the level of erythema induced by the anionic surfactant
alone, even though the overall concentration of surfactant in the mixture was
increased. Even more, a solution with 20% LAS + 10% SLES + 10% AE (total
concentration of 40%) was found to be less irritating than a solution of only 20% LAS.
l Hall-Manning et al. (32), using the four-hour human patch test, investigated the
interaction between highly concentrated anionic and amphoteric surfactants and
showed that the irritant effect on skin of the mixtures (20% of sodium dodecyl sulfate +
20% of dimethyl dodecyl amido betaine) was significantly lower than the effect of the
anionic surfactant (at 20%) tested alone. The authors pointed out the correlation
between the reduced irritation and the reduced CMC for the mixture of surfactants.
However, at such a high surfactant concentration, they also attributed the lowered
irritation potential to a reduced affinity of the individual surfactants for the skin
proteins.
Anti-Irritation by Polymers or Proteins/Peptides
The counterirritant capability of polymers or proteins on surfactants has been reported in the
literature (61,66–68). The mechanism by which polymers and proteins function is similar to the
one described above for surfactant mixtures. They incorporate into the micelles and thus
decrease the relative amount of free monomers in solution. Their skin substantivity can also
involve blocking binding sites at the surface of the skin, thus making them nonaccessible to
surfactants.
Polymers or proteins differ in their ability to interact with the skin surface and to be
incorporated into the micelles. The following parameters should be considered when selecting
a polymer/protein:
462
Paye

=== Page 480 ===
l Better interaction with the micelles correlates with increased hydrophobicity (66).
l Better substantivity to the skin correlates with higher hydrophobicity when the
polymer is quaternized or is cationic or when the net charge or the size of the
polymer/protein increases (67,68).
As stated above, more hydrophobic and/or larger polymers/proteins are much more effective
to depress the skin irritation potential of surfactants.
However, in the literature, the anti-irritant effect of proteins/polymers in the presence of
surfactants has been demonstrated mostly in single surfactant solutions, and at a high
polymer-surfactant ratio, not always compatible with other properties of the finished product.
When they are formulated into finished products already optimized for skin compatibility
through an appropriate combination of surfactants, most polymers or proteins do not bring
any further mildness benefit to the product (unpublished data).
Anti-Irritation by Refattening Agents
One of the negative effects of surfactants on skin is the alteration of its lipid barrier. This
can be easily assessed by measuring the TEWL (56,69), which increases with an impairment
of the barrier. Using refattening ingredients or skin barrier–repairing ingredients in
surfactant-based products can reduce the disruption of the barrier function if those
ingredients are appropriately delivered to the skin surface. Such ingredients are often the
basis for the barrier cream effect of creams (lotions) topically applied before or after contact
with an irritant. Some of these ingredients can also be formulated into a surfactant system
and act directly as anti-irritants in the mixture. The occlusive effect they bring at the surface
of the skin delays the water loss and maintains the skin in a less-dehydrated state.
Furthermore, they can progressively form an additional barrier protecting the skin against
the surfactants in repetitive product applications conditions. Several types of refattening
ingredients are available and can be formulated in surfactant systems. Among these are
ethoxylated mono-, di-, and tri-glycerides, fatty alcohols and ethoxylated fatty alcohols,
fatty acid esters, lanolin derivatives, or silicone derivatives. A few products containing a
high percentage of oil also exist and can possibly be added to surfactant systems to serve in
a barrier protection role.
Anti-Inflammatory Effect
Anti-inflammatory ingredients are not specific for surfactant-induced irritation, and most of
them are used in pharmacology rather than in cosmetology. Because of the complexity of the
inflammatory process, several families of anti-inflammatory ingredients have been developed
such as glucocorticoids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (tacrolimus, cyclosporin,
rapamycin, ascomycin, and leflunomide), flavonoids, essential oils, or a-bisabolol (70–72). In
order to be effective, such ingredients must be delivered to the skin in a bioavailable form and
in a sufficient amount. The case of essential oils, flavonoids, and a-bisabolol is discussed in
more details in other sections of this handbook.
Antioxidants
In biological systems, antioxidants processes have a protective role against oxidative stress
through three different mechanisms:
l By scavenging the early pro-oxidant species
l By preventing the initiation or the propagation of the free-radical reactions
l By returning oxidized groups to their reduced state
In dermatology and cosmetology applications, antioxidants belong to a relatively new
field of investigation and interest. Some of the most important antioxidants with known
applications are vitamin E, vitamin C, thiols, polyphenols, and flavonoids. Their mechanism of
action in the antioxidant process is reviewed by Weber et al. [Chapter 28]. In surfactant-based
products, antioxidants are only occasionally used to reduce the skin irritation potential of the
product (73). However, several cutaneous enzymes are involved in the protection of the skin
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants
463

=== Page 481 ===
against free radicals and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Such enzymes are partly denatured
once surfactants penetrate the skin and the natural defense mechanisms of the skin may then
become overwhelmed leading to an oxidative stress situation. Any supplementation of the skin
with scavenging systems to, for example, combat surfactant irritation could result in a reduced
irritation response.
Anti-Sensory Irritation
Although much less discussed than the clinical irritation, which is characterized by observable
or functional alterations, subjective irritation also exists. It does not have great interest for the
dermatologists, but for cosmetologists it can be the reason consumers like or reject their
product.
Three different categories of sensory signals of irritation have been identified. Briefly,
these are
l stinging, burning, and itching signals;
l dryness and tightness perception preceding clinical signs of irritation; and
l peculiar “irritated skin”–perceived signals unrelated with a true irritation process.
These types of irritant signals will require different “anti-irritant” systems.
Anti-Irritants for Stinging, Burning, and Itching Sensations
Strontium salts have been demonstrated to be effective and selective anti-irritants for
chemically induced sensory irritation associated with stinging, burning, or itching manifes-
tations (36). Strontium salts (nitrate or chloride) are claimed to be especially indicated for
subjects with sensitive facial skin and prone to stinging sensations (36,74). The interest of
strontium salts, as described by Hahn (36), is that they are very specific and selective inhibitors
of the sensory signals of irritation, without suppressing other receptors (such as temperature,
tactile, pressure, etc.).
Several controlled clinical studies (36,75) were run to show that strontium nitrate or
chloride, at concentrations from 5% to 20%, effectively suppressed or reduced sensory
irritation caused by chemical or biological irritants over a wide range of pHs from 0.6 to 12. In
tests, the strontium salts were included in the solution with the irritant, or before or after the
application of the irritant as shown in Table 3.
Although not tested in surfactant systems, strontium salts may play a similar beneficial
effect on surfactant-induced sensory irritation, mainly in certain classes of sensitive skin
subjects.
As described within the mechanism of sensory irritation, it has been observed in some
studies that, on top of reducing the sensorial signs of irritation, strontium salts could also
decrease the level of erythematous reactions generated by the irritant.
Table 3
Clinical Tests Support the Anti-Sensory Irritant Potential of Strontium Salts
Irritant
Test site
Timing of applicationa
Lactic acid, 7.5%, pH 1.9 (solution)
Face
Mixed, pre or post
Lactic acid, 15%, pH 3.0 (solution)
Face
Mixed
Glycolic acid, 70%, pH 0.6 (peeling solution)
Arm
Mixed
Capryloyl salicylic acid, 1% (exfoliant cream)
Cheek
Mixed
Ascorbic acid, 30%, pH 1.7 (solution)
Face
Mixed
Aluminum chloride, 20% (antiperspirant preparation)
Axilla
Pre
Aluminum/zirconium salt, 25% (antiperspirant solution)
Arm
Mixed
Calcium thioglycolate, pH 9–12 (depilatory lotion)
Leg
Post
Histamine (intradermal injection, 100 mg)
Forearm
Pre
a“Pre” means that strontium salts were applied to skin prior to the irritant, “post” means that the salts
were applied after skin had been irritated by the irritant, and “mixed” means that strontium salts were
included in the preparation with the irritant.
Source: From Ref. 36.
464
Paye

=== Page 482 ===
Although several hypotheses have been communicated to explain the mechanism of
action of strontium salts (36,76), the mode of action still remains unclear. Below, please find
some of author’s thoughts on this matter:
l Because strontium salts mitigate the irritant event immediately after application, it is
assumed that they act directly on the type-C nociceptor and suppress the neuronal
depolarization that normally transmits the sensory signal to the brain.
l By their analogy to calcium, strontium salts could also use calcium channels to induce
the release of neurotransmitters in synapsis or could antagonize the usual calcium-
induced depolarization.
l It is also not impossible that strontium salts could directly influence keratinocytes or
inflammatory cells and regulate the release of some cytokines.
Anti-Irritants for Dryness/Tightness Perception
Tightness and dryness perception are usually the earliest warning signs detected by highly
receptive subjects using products that are not irritating with one single use but can become
slightly irritating or skin drying after multiple exposures. These signs are generally followed, if
the product is not discontinued, by the progressive development of clinical signs of intolerance
such as scaling, flaking, or even erythema (77).
This kind of subclinical irritation is essentially observed for surfactant-based products
and refattening agents, as described above, should be incorporated into the formula at a high
concentration to mitigate the drying effect. Additionally, topical skin rehydrating preparations
can also be effective in some cases to decrease the dryness/tightness perception.
Anti-Irritants for Negative Sensory Skin Feel
Negative subjective sensory signals that are translated as “irritated skin” by the consumers
while totally independent of irritation can be addressed in two ways:
l If these signals are induced by the surfactant-based product, the surfactant system
should be reformulated. Indeed, each surfactant is associated with a specific
perception to the skin such as slipperiness, smoothness (perception of a mild product)
or, at the extreme, roughness, and drag (perception of an irritant product). A good
combination of surfactants can provide the desired skin feel and signal.
l Skin feel additives may be added to the product to deliver smoothness, silkiness, and a
hydrated feel associated with a “non-irritated” skin signal. A review of the skin feel
additives has been made by Zocchi in another section of this handbook (Chapter 34).
The Effect of Divalent Cations on Skin Irritation
Magnesium is not an Anti-Irritant for Surfactants (78)
Magnesium is frequently described as a depressor of skin irritation. Such a false idea is
essentially arising from in vitro data based on protein denaturation tests. In those tests, the
more a surfactant solution denatures a protein, the more it is predicted to be an irritant to the
skin; and magnesium clearly depresses surfactant-induced protein denaturation in vitro (79).
However, when well-controlled in vivo tests were performed to investigate the effect of
magnesium directly on human volunteers, it was confirmed that magnesium does not decrease
the skin irritation potential of surfactants or surfactant-based products (78). The in vivo studies
included both acute irritation by occlusive patch tests and chronic irritation by repetitive short-
term applications of the products. The study compared sodium and magnesium salts of
surfactants (e.g., magnesium and SLS) in single solutions or incorporated into finished
products and investigated the effect of adding magnesium sulfate to a solution of surfactant.
Some preliminary studies with calcium showed a behavior similar to magnesium
(personal data) with an inhibition of protein denaturation in vitro while no reduction of
irritation in vivo.
Zinc Salts May be Potent Anti-Irritants for Surfactants
Zinc is a key co-element in more than 200 enzymatic reactions that happen in the skin and is, as
such, of critical importance to the skin (80). A few publications have shown the beneficial
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants
465

=== Page 483 ===
protective effect of topically applied zinc oxide on skin irritation (81) and as a mediator of
oxidative stress (82). Zinc oxide has also been incorporated into skin protective aerosol
compositions to protect a baby’s bottom from erythema (83), and in surfactant-based liquid
products to exert a substantial anti-irritant effect on skin (84). Other zinc salts have been
incorporated in leave-on products (gels, creams, lotions, or ointments) to reduce or prevent
dermal or mucosal irritation (85).
More recently, Rigano L et al. have shown that zinc salts of coceth sulfate were very
mild to the skin and that zinc salts of lauryl ether sulfate were milder than their sodium
counterpart (86).
In view of the many situations in skin where zinc plays an essential role, the exact
mechanism by which the zinc element exerts its beneficial effect on skin irritation has still,
however, not been elucidated.
CONCLUSION
This chapter describes how surfactants interact with the skin and briefly reviews several
systems by which it is now possible to control the skin irritation potential of surfactant-based
products. This can be done through a
l modification of surfactant behavior in solution;
l modification of surfactant interaction with the skin surface;
l protection of the skin surface via ingredients (e.g., lipids, proteins, and polymers); and
l control of their subjective perception by the consumer using strontium salts or skin feel
agents.
These anti-irritant systems, combined with a selection of mild surfactants allow the
cosmetic formulator to design very mild hygiene products.
Other anti-irritant systems also exist for leave-on cosmetics and in pharmacology such as
antioxidants and anti-inflammatory ingredients. They are still not yet commonly used in
surfactant-based products but, if correctly delivered to the skin during the use of the product,
they could provide a new field of research for improving the tolerance of cleansing products.
REFERENCES
1. Tupker RA. Detergents and cleansers. In: van der Valk PGM, Maibach HI, eds. The Irritant Contact
Dermatitis Syndrome. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1996:71–76.
2. Berardesca E, Andersen PH, Bjerring P, et al. Erythema induced by organic solvents: in vivo
evaluation of oxygenized and deoxygenized hemoglobin by reflectance spectroscopy. Contact
Dermatitis 1992; 27:8–11.
3. Treffel P, Gabard B. Bioengineering measurements of barrier creams efficacy against toluene and
NaOH in an in vivo single irritation test. Skin Res Technol 1996; 2:83–87.
4. Lachapelle JM. Occupational airborn irritant contact reaction to the dust of a food additive. Contact
Dermatitis 1984; 10:250–251.
5. Fischer T, Rystedt I. False-positive, follicular and irritant patch test reactions to metal salts. Contact
Dermatitis 1985; 12:93–98.
6. de Haan P, Meester HHM, Bruynzeel DP. Irritancy of alcohols. In: van der Valk PGM, Maibach HI,
eds. The Irritant Contact Dermatitis Syndrome. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1996:65–70.
7. Rycroft RJG. Cutting fluids, oil, and lubricants. In: Maibach HI, ed. Occupational and Industrial
Dermatology. 2nd ed. Chicago, London: Year Book Medical Publ, 1987:286–289.
8. Willis IA. The effects of prolonged water exposure on human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1973; 60:166.
9. Rystedt RJG. Low-humidity occupational dermatosis. Dermatologic Clinics 1984; 2:553–560.
10. Lawrence CM, Schuster S. Mechanism of anthralin inflammation. I. Dissociation of response to
clobetasol and indomethacin. Br J Dermatol 1985; 113:107–115.
11. Fischer T, Rystedt I. Hand eczema among hard-metal workers. Am J Ind Med 1985; 8:381–394.
12. van der Valk PGM, Maibach HI. Post-application occlusion substantially increases the irritant
response of the skin to repeated short-term sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) exposure. Contact Dermatitis
1989; 21:335–338.
13. Stoner JG, Rasmussen JE. Plant dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1983; 9:1–15.
14. Kennedy CTC. Reactions to mechanical and thermal injury. In: Champion RH, Burton JL, Ebling FJG,
eds. Textbook of Dermatology. 5th ed Oxford: Blackwell Scientific, 1992:777.
466
Paye

=== Page 484 ===
15. Pierard GE, Arrese JE, Rodriguez C, et al. Effects of softened and unsoftened fabrics on sensitive skin.
Contact Dermatitis 1994; 30:286–291.
16. Buckingham KW, Berg RW. Etiologic factors in diaper dermatitis: the role of feces. Pediatr Dermatol
1986; 3:107–112.
17. Epstein WL. House and garden plants. In: Jackson EM, Goldner R, eds. Irritant Contact Dermatitis.
New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc,, 1990:127–165.
18. Lee CH, Maibach HI. The sodium lauryl sulfate model: an overview. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33:1–7.
19. EC Directive 67/548/EEC.
20. Prater E, Goring HD, Schubert H. Sodium lauryl sulfate: a contact allergen. Contact Dermatitis 1978;
4:242–243.
21. Dillarstone A, Paye M. Classification of surfactant-containing products as “skin irritants.” Contact
Dermatitis 1994; 30:314–315.
22. Agner T, Serup J. Sodium lauryl sulfate for irritant patch testing: a dose-response study using
bioengineering methods for determination of skin irritation. J Invest Dermatol 1990; 95:543–547.
23. Tominaga T. Diffusion process in mixed surfactant systems. In: Abe, Scamehorn JF, eds. Mixed
Surfactant Systems. 2nd edition. New York: Marcel Dekker Publ. Surf Sci Series, 2005:124:135–163.
24. Garcia MT, Ribosa I, Sanchez Leal J, et al. Monomer–micelle equilibrium in the diffusion of surfactants
in binary systems through collagen films. J Am Oil Chem Soc 1992; 69:25–29.
25. Polefka TG. Surfactant interactions with skin. In: Broze G, ed. Handbook of Detergents Part A:
Properties. Surf Sci Series vol 82. New York: Basel, Marcel Dekker Publ, 1999:433–468.
26. Faucher JA, Goddard ED. Interaction of keratinous substrates with sodium lauryl sulfate. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1978; 29:323–337.
27. Breuer MM. The interaction between surfactants and keratinous tissues. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1979;
30:41–64.
28. Robbins CR, Fernee KM. Some observations on the swelling of human epidermal membrane. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1983; 34:21–34.
29. Rhein LD, Robbins CR, Fernee K, et al. Surfactant structure effects on swelling of isolated human
stratum corneum. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1986; 37:125–139.
30. Schepky AG, Holtzmann U, Siegner R, et al. Influence of cleansing on stratum corneum tryptic
enzyme in human skin. Intl J Cosmet Sci 2004; 26(5):245–253.
31. Fartasch M. Human barrier formation and reaction to irritation. Curr Probl Dermatol 1995; 23:95–103.
32. Hall-Manning TJ, Holland GH, Rennie G, et al. Skin irritation potential of mixed surfactant systems.
Food Chem Toxicol 1998; 36:233–238.
33. Moore PN, Puvvada S, Blankschtein D. Challenging the surfactant monomer skin penetration model:
penetration of sodium dodecyl sulfate micelles into the epidermis. J Cosmet Sci 2003; 54:29–49.
34. Loffler H, Happle R. Profile of irritant patch testing with detergents: sodium lauryl sulfate, sodium
laureth sulfate, and alkyl polyglucoside. Contact Dermatitis 2003; 48(1):26–32.
35. Frosch PJ, Kligman A. Method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied substances.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 47:1–11.
36. Hahn GS. Antisensory anti-irritants. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic
Science and Technology. New York; Marcel Dekker Inc, 2001:285–298.
37. Rhein LD, Simion FA. Surfactant interactions with skin. Surf Sci Ser 1991; 32:33–49.
38. Lee CH, Kawasaki Y, Maibach HI. Effect of surfactant mixtures on irritant contact dermatitis potential
in man: sodium lauroyl glutamate and sodium lauryl sulfate. Contact Dermatitis 1994; 30:205–209.
39. Dillarstone A, Paye M. Antagonism in concentrated surfactant systems. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 28:198.
40. Dominguez JG, Balaguer F, Parra JL, et al. The inhibitory effect of some amphoteric surfactants on the
irritation potential of alkyl sulfates. Intl J Cosmet Sci 1981; 3:57–68.
41. Teglia A, Secchi G. Minimizing the cutaneous effect of anionic detergents. Cosmet Toilet 1996; 111:61–70.
42. Paye M, Jacobs C. In vivo analysis of surfactants at skin surface by ATR-FTIR: bioengineering and the
skin symposium. Boston, MA, Sept 25–28, 1998.
43. Moore PN, Shiloach A, Puvvada S, et al. Penetration of mixed micelles into the epidermis: effect of
mixing dodecyl sulfate with dodecyl hexa(ethylene oxide). J Cosmet Sci 2003; 54:143–159.
44. Goldemberg RL, Safrin L. Reduction of topical irritation. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:667–679.
45. Goldemberg RL. Anti-irritants. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1979; 30:415–427.
46. Effendy I, Maibach HI. Surfactants and experimental irritant contact dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis
1995; 33:217–225.
47. Paye M, Pierard GE. Skin care/detergents. In: Gabard B, Elsner P, Surber C, Treffel P, eds.
Dermatopharmacology of Topical Preparations. Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag Publ,
2000:297–315.
48. Paye M. Anti-irritants for surfactant-based products. In: Paye M, Barel AO, Maibach HI, eds.
Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology. 2nd edition. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis Publ,
2006:369–376.
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants
467

=== Page 485 ===
49. Paye M. Anti-irritants. In: Chew A-L, Maibach HI, eds. Irritant Dermatitis. Berlin, Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer Verlag Publ, 2006:421–434.
50. Ohbu K, Jona N, Miyajima N, et al. Evaluation of denaturation property of surfactants onto protein as
measured by circular dichroism. J Jpn Oil Chem Soc 1980; 29:866–871.
51. Miyazawa K, Ogawa M, Mitsui T. The physicochemical properties and protein denaturation potential
of surfactant mixtures. Int J Cosm Sci 1984; 6:33–46.
52. Blake-Haskins JC, Scala D, Rhein LD. Predicting surfactant irritation from the swelling response of a
collagen film. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1986; 37(4):199–210.
53. Tadenuma H, Yamada K, Tamura T. Analysis of protein-mixed surfactant system interactions: the
BSA-SDS and polyoxyethylene alkylether system. J Jpn Oil Chem Soc 1999; 48:207–213.
54. Paye M, Block C, Hamaide N, et al. Antagonisms between surfactants: the case of laundry detergents.
Tenside, Surfactants, Detergents 2006; 43(6):290–294.
55. Charaf UK, Hart GL. Phospholipid liposomes/surfactant interactions as predictors of skin irritation.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1991; 42(2):71–86.
56. Kawasaki Y, Quan D, Sakamoto K, et al. Influence of surfactant mixtures on intercellular lipid fluidity
and skin barrier function. Skin Res Technol 1999; 5:96–101.
57. Earl LK, Hall-Manning TJ, Holland GH, et al. Skin irritation potential of surfactant mixtures: using
relevant doses in in vitro systems. ATLA 1996; 24:249, (abstr 73).
58. Benassi L, Bertazzoni G, Magnoni C, et al. Decrease in toxic potential of mixed tensides maintained
below the critical micelle concentration: an in vitro study. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2003;
16:156–164.
59. Rhein LD, Simion FA, Hill RL, et al. Human cutaneous response to a mixed surfactant system: role of
solution phenomena in controlling surfactant irritation. Dermatological 1990; 180:18–23.
60. Marti ME. Shampoo formulae based on today’s raw materials, compounds, and know-how. S0FW
1990; 116(7):258–263.
61. Zehnder S, Mark R, Manning S, et al. A human in vivo method for assessing reduction of the irritation
potential of sodium lauryl sulfate by mild surfactants: validation with a carboxylate with two
different degrees of ethoxylation. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1992; 43(6):313–330.
62. Teglia A, Secchi G. New protein ingredients for skin detergency: native wheat protein-surfactant
complexes. Intl J Cosmet Sci 1994; 16:235–246.
63. Paye M, Cartiaux Y. Squamometry: a tool to move from exaggerated to more and more realistic
application conditions for comparing the skin compatibility of surfactant-based products. Intl J
Cosmet Sci 1999; 21:59–68.
64. McFadden JP, Holloway DB, Whittle EG, et al. Benzalkonium chloride neutralizes the irritant effect of
sodium lauryl sulfate. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 43:264–266.
65. Vilaplana J, Lecha M, Trullas C, et al. A physicochemical approach to minimize the irritant capacity of
anionic surfactants. Exogenous Dermatol 2002; 1:22–26.
66. Teglia A, Mazzola G, Secchi G. Relationships between chemical characteristics and cosmetic
properties of protein hydrolysates. Cosm Toilet 1993; 108:56–65.
67. Goddard ED, Leung PS. Protection of skin by cationic cellulosics: in vitro testing methods. Cosmet
Toilet 1982; 97:55–69.
68. Pugliese P, Hines G, Wielenga W. Skin protective properties of a cationic guar derivative. Cosmet
Toilet 1990; 105:105–111.
69. Van der Valk PGM, Nater JP, Bleumink E. Skin irritancy of surfactants as assessed by water vapor loss
measurements. J Invest Dermatol 1984; 82:291–293.
70. Scho¨n MP. Homey B, Ruzicka T. Antiphlogistics (Dermocorticoids and topical immunomodulators).
In: Gabard B, Elsner P, Surber C, Treffel P, eds. Dermato-Pharmacology of Topical Preparations.
Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2000:179–190.
71. Li BQ, Fu T, Gong W, et al. The flavonoid baicalin exhibits anti-inflammatory activity by binding to
chemokines. Immunopharmacol 2000; 49:295–306.
72. Stanzl K, Vollhardt J. The case of a-bisabolol. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of
Cosmetic Science and Technology. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc, 2001:277–284.
73. Katsarou A, Davoy E, Xenos K, et al. Effect of an antioxidant (quercetin) on sodium lauryl sulfate-
induced skin irritation. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 42:85–89.
74. Hahn GS. Strontium is a potent and selective inhibitor of sensory irritation. Dermatol Surg 1999;
25:689–694.
75. Zhai H, Hannon W, Hahn G, et al. Strontium nitrate suppresses chemically-induced sensory irritation
in humans. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 42:98–100.
76. Brewster B. MDs address sensory irritation from AHAS. Cosmet Toilet 2000; 113(4):9–10.
77. Simion FA, Rhein LD, Morrison BM Jr, et al. Self-perceived sensory responses to soap and synthetic
bars correlate with clinical signs of irritation. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 32:205–211.
78. Paye M, Zocchi G, Broze G. Magnesium as skin irritation depressor: fact or artifact? Proceedings of the
XXVIII Jornadas Anuales del CED, Barcelona, Spain, June 1998; 449–456.
468
Paye

=== Page 486 ===
79. Goffin V, Paye M, Pie´rard GE. Comparison of in vitro predictive tests for irritation induced by anionic
surfactants. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33:38–41.
80. Frydrych A, Arct J, Kasiura K. Zinc: a critical important element in cosmetology. J Appl Cosmetol
2004; 22:1–13.
81. Baldwin S, Odio MR, Haines SL, et al. Skin benefits from continuous topical administration of a zinc
oxide/petrolatum formulation by a novel disposable diaper. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2001; 15
(Suppl 1):5–11.
82. Hayashi S, Takeshita H, Nagao N, et al. The relationship between UVB screening and cytoprotection
by microcorpuscular ZnO or ascorbate against DNA photodamage and membrane injuries in
keratinocytes by oxidative stress. J Photochem Photobiol 2001; 64:27–35.
83. Healy MS, Nelson DGA. Skin protectant spray compositions. US patent 6949249,2005.
84. Paye M. Zinc oxide containing surfactant solution. US patent 10/681935 2003.
85. Modak SM, Shintre MS, Caraos L, et al. Zinc salt compositions for the prevention of dermal and
mucosal irritation. US patent 20040102429. 2004.
86. Rigano L, Merlo E, Guala F, et al. Stabilized solutions of zinc coceth sulfate for skin cleansing and skin
care. Cosmet Toilet 2005; 120(4):103–108.
Mechanism of Skin Irritation by Surfactants
469

=== Page 488 ===
44
In Vivo Irritation
Saqib J. Bashir and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Irritant Dermatitis
Skin irritation is a localized nonimmunologically mediated inflammatory process. It may
manifest objectively with skin changes such as erythema, edema, and vesiculation or subjectively
with the complaints of burning, stinging, or itching, with no detectable, visible, or microscopic
changes. Several forms of objective irritation exist (Tabel 1). Acute irritant dermatitis may follow
a single, usually accidental, exposure to a potent irritant and generally heals soon after exposure.
An irritant reaction may be seen in individuals such as hairdressers and wet-work-performing
employees, who are more extensively and regularly exposed to irritants. Repeated irritant reactions
may develop into a contact dermatitis, which generally has a good prognosis. Other forms of
irritant dermatitis include delayed acute irritant contact dermatitis, which occurs when there is a
delay between exposure and inflammation, and cumulative irritant dermatitis, which is the most
common form of irritant contact dermatitis. After exposure, an acute irritant dermatitis is not seen,
but invisible skin changes occur, which eventually lead to an irritant dermatitis when exposure
reaches a threshold point. This may follow days, weeks, or years of exposure (1). These various
forms require specialized models to predict their occurrence after exposure to specific products.
Need for Models
Prevention of skin irritation is important for both the consumer who will suffer from it and for
the industry, which needs a licensable and marketable product. Accurate prediction of the
irritation potential of industrial, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic materials is therefore necessary
for the consumer health and safety and for product development. Presently, animal models
fulfill licensing criteria for regulatory bodies. In the European Union (EU), animal testing for
cosmetics was to be banned in 1998; however, the deadline was extended to June 30, 2000,
because scientifically validated models were not available. Until alternative models can be
substituted, in vivo models provide a means by which a cosmetic can be tested on living skin,
at various sites, and under conditions that should closely mimic the intended human use.
Many aspects of irritation have been described, ranging from the visible erythema and
edema to molecular mediators such as interleukins and prostaglandins. Therefore, a variety of
in vivo and in vitro approaches to experimental assay are possible. However, no model assays
inflammation in its entirety. Each model is limited by our ability to interpret and extrapolate
the features of inflammation to the desired context. Therefore, predicting human responses on
the basis of data from nonhuman models requires particular care.
Various human experimental models have been proposed, providing irritant data for the
relevant species. Human models allow the substance to be tested in the manner that the
general public will use it, e.g., wash testing (see the following section) attempts to mimic
the consumer’s use of soaps and other surfactants. Also, humans are able to provide subjective
data on the degree of irritation caused by the product. However, human studies are also
limited by pitfalls in interpretation, and by the fear of applying new substances to human skin
before their irritant potential has been evaluated.
ANIMAL MODELS
Draize Rabbit Models
The Draize model (2) and its modifications are commonly used to assay skin irritation using
albino rabbits. Various governmental agencies have adopted these methods as standard test
procedure. The procedure adopted in the U.S. Federal Hazardous Substance Act is described

=== Page 489 ===
in Tables 2 and 3 (3–5). Table 4 compares this method with some other modifications of the
Draize model.
Draize used a scoring system to calculate the primary irritation index (PII). This is
calculated by averaging the erythema scores and the edema scores of all sites (abraded and
non-abraded). These two averages are then added together to give the PII value. A value of less
than 2 was considered nonirritating, 2 to 5 mildly irritating, and greater than 5 severely
Table 1
Classification of Irritant Dermatitis
Classification
Features
Clinical picture
Acute irritant dermatitis
Single exposure
Reaction usually restricted to exposed
area, appears within minutes
Strong irritant
Erythema, edema, blisters, bullae,
pustules, later eschar formation
Individual predisposition considered
generally unimportant
Symptoms include burning, stinging,
and pain
Possible secondary infection
Good prognosis
Irritant reaction
Follows repeated acute skin
irritation
Repeated irritant reactions may
develop into contact dermatitis
Often occupational; hairdressers,
wet workers
Good prognosis
Cumulative irritant dermatitis
Repeated exposures required
Initially subject may experience stinging
Initial exposures cause invisible
damage
Eventually erythema, edema, or scaling
appears
Exposure may be weeks, months,
or years until dermatitis develops
Variable prognosis
Individual variation is seen
Delayed acute irritant
contact dermatitis
Latent period of 12–24 hr between
exposure and dermatitis
Clinically similar to acute irritant
dermatitis
Good prognosis
Subclinical irritation
Irritation detectable by bioengineering
methods prior to development
the of irritant dermatitis
Subjective irritation
Subject complains of irritant symptoms
with no clinically visible irritation
Perceived burning, stinging, or itching
Traumatic irritant
dermatitis
Follows acute skin trauma, e.g., burn
or laceration
Incomplete healing, followed by
erythema, vesicles, vesicopapules,
and scaling; may later resemble
nummular (coin-shaped) dermatitis
Pusstular and acneiform
dermatitis
Caused by metals, oils, greases, tar,
asphalt, chlorinated napthalenes,
polyhalogenated naphthalenes,
cosmetics
Develops over weeks to months
Variable prognosis
Friction dermatitis
Caused by friction trauma
Sometimes seen on hands and knees
Table 2
Draize-FHSA Model
Number of animals
Six albino rabbits (clipped)
Test sites
Two square inch sites on dorsum
1 site intact, the other abraded, e.g., with hypodermic needle
Test materials
Applied undiluted to both test sites
Liquids: 0.5 mL
Solids/semisolids: 0.5 g
Occlusion
One square inch surgical gauze over each test site
Rubberized cloth over entire trunk
Occlusion
24-hr period
Assessment
24 and 72 hr
Visual scoring system
Abbreviation: FHSA, Federal Hazardous Substance Act.
472
Bashir and Maibach

=== Page 490 ===
irritating. A value of 5 defines an irritant by Consumer Product Safety Commission standards.
Subsequent laboratory and clinical experience that has shown the value judgments (i.e.,
nonirritating, mildly irritating, and severely irritating) proposed in 1944 requires clinical
judgment and perspective and should not be viewed in an absolute sense. Many materials
irritating to the rabbit may be well tolerated by human skin.
Although the Draize scoring system does not include vesiculation, ulceration, and severe
eschar formation, all of the Draize-type tests are used to evaluate corrosion as well as irritation.
When severe and potentially irreversible reactions occur, the test sites are further observed on
days 7 and 14, or later if necessary.
Modifications to the Draize assay have attempted to improve its prediction of human
experience. The model is criticized for inadequately differentiating between mild and
moderate irritants. However, it serves well in hazard identification, often over-predicting the
severity of human skin reactions (5). Therefore, Draize assays continue to be recommended by
regulatory bodies for drugs and industrial chemicals.
Cumulative Irritation Assays
Several assays study the effects of cumulative exposure to a potential irritant. Justice et al. (6)
administered seven applications of surfactant solutions at 10-minute intervals to the clipped
dorsum of albino mice. The test site was occluded with a rubber dam to prevent evaporation,
and the skin was examined microscopically for epidermal erosion.
Table 3
Draize-FHSA Scoring System
Source
Erythema and eschar formation
0
No erythema
Very slight erythema (barely perceptible)
1
Well-defined erythema
2
Moderate to severe erythema
3
Severe erythema (beet redness) to slight eschar
4
Formation (injuries in depth)
Edema formation
No edema
0
Very slight edema (barely perceptible)
1
Slight edema (edges of area well defined by definite raising)
2
Moderate edema (raised >1 mm)
3
Severe edema (raised >1 mm and extending beyond the area of exposure)
4
Abbreviation: FHSA, Federal Hazardous Substance Act.
Source: From Ref. 4.
Table 4
Examples of Modified Draize Irritation Method
Draize
FHSA
DOT
FIFRA
OECD
Number of animals 3
6
6
6
6
Abrasion/intact
Both
Both
Intact 2 of each
Intact
Dose liquids
0.5 mL undiluted
0.5 mL
0.5 mL undiluted
0.5 mL
Dose solids in
solvent
0.5 g
0.5 g moistened
0.5 g moistened
0.5 g
0.5 g
Exposure
period (hr)
24
24
4
4
4
Examination (hr)
24, 72
24, 72
4, 48
0.5, 1, 24, 48, 72
0.5, 1, 24, 48, 72
Removal of test
materials
Not specified
Not specified
Skin washed
Skin wiped
Skin washed
Excluded from
testing
—
—
—
Toxic materials pH
S2 or > 11.5
Toxic materials pH
S2 or > 11.5
Abbreviations: FHSA, Federal Hazardous Substance Act; DOT, Department of Transportation; FIFRA, Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act; OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Source: From Ref. 4.
In Vivo Irritation
473

=== Page 491 ===
Frosch et al. (7) described the guinea pig repeat irritation test (RIT) to evaluate protective
creams against the chemical irritants, sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), sodium hydroxide (NaOH),
and toluene. The irritants were applied daily for two weeks to shaved back skin of young
guinea pigs. Barrier creams were applied to the test animals two hours before and immediately
after exposure to the irritant. Control animals were only treated with the irritant. Erythema
was measured visually, and by bioengineering methods: laser Doppler flowmetry and
transepidermal water loss (TEWL). One barrier cream was effective against SLS and toluene,
whereas the other tested was not. In a follow-up study, another allegedly protective cream
failed to inhibit irritation caused by SLS and toluene and exaggerated irritation to NaOH,
contrary to its recommended use (8). The RIT is proposed as an animal model to test the
efficacy of barrier creams, and a human version, described below, has also been proposed.
Repeat application patch tests have been developed to rank the irritant potential of
products. Putative irritants are applied to the same site for 3 to 21 days, under occlusion. The
degree of occlusion influences percutaneous penetration, which may in turn influence the
sensitivity of the test. Patches used vary from Draize-type gauze dressings to metal chambers.
Therefore, a reference irritant material is often included in the test to facilitate interpretation of
the results. Various animal species have also been used, such as the guinea pig and the rabbit
(9,10). Wahlberg measured skinfold thickness with Harpenden calipers to assess the edema-
producing capacity of chemicals in guinea pigs. This model showed clear dose-response
relationships and discriminating power, except for acids and alkalis where no change in
skinfold thickness was found.
Open application assays are also used for repeat irritation testing. Marzulli and Maibach
(11) described a cumulative irritation assay in rabbits that uses open applications and control
reference compounds. The test substances are applied 16 times over a three-week period, and
the results are measured with a visual score for erythema and skin thickness measurements.
These two parameters are highly correlated. A significant correlation was also shown between
the scores of 60 test substances in the rabbit and in man, suggesting that the rabbit assay is a
powerful predictive model.
Anderson et al. (12) used an open application procedure in guinea pigs to rank weak
irritants. A baseline response to SLS solution was obtained after three applications per day for
three days to a 1 cm2 test area. This baseline is used to compare other irritants, of which
trichloroethane was the most irritant, similar to 2% SLS. Histology showed a mononuclear
dermal inflammatory response.
Immersion Assay
The guinea pig immersion assay was developed to assess the irritant potential of aqueous
surfactant-based solutions, but might be extended to other occupational settings such as
aqueous cutting fluids. Restrained guinea pigs are immersed in the test solution while
maintaining their head above water. The possibility of systemic absorption of a lethal dose
restricts the study to products of limited toxic potential. Therefore, the test concentration is
usually limited to 10%.
Ten guinea pigs are immersed in a 408C solution for four hours daily for three days. A
comparison group is immersed in a reference solution. Twenty-four hours after the final
immersion, the animals’ flanks are shaved and evaluated for erythema, edema, and fissures
(13–16). Gupta et al. (17) concomitantly tested the dermatotoxic effects of detergents in guinea
pigs and humans, using the immersion test and the patch test, respectively. Epidermal erosion
and a 40% to 60% increase in the histamine content of the guinea pig skin were found, in
addition to a positive patch test reaction in seven of eight subjects.
Mouse Ear Model
Uttley and Van Abbe (18) applied undiluted shampoos to one ear of mice daily for four days,
visually quantifying the degree of inflammation as vessel dilatation, erythema, and edema.
Patrick and Maibach (19) measured ear thickness to quantify the inflammatory response to
surfactant-based products and other chemicals. This allowed quantification of dose-response
relationships and comparison of chemicals. Inoue et al. (20) used this model to compare the
mechanism of mustard oil-induced skin inflammation with the mechanism of capsaicin-
induced inflammation. Mice were pretreated with various receptor antagonists, such as 5-HT2,
HI, and tachykinin antagonists, showing that the tachykinin NK1 receptor was an important
474
Bashir and Maibach

=== Page 492 ===
mediator of inflammation induced by mustard oil. The mouse models provide simplicity and
objective measurements. Relevance for man requires elucidation.
Other Methods
Several other assays of skin irritation have been suggested. Humphrey (21) quantified the
amount of Evans blue dye recovered from rat skin after exposure to skin irritants. Trush et al.
(22) used myeloperoxidase in polymorphonuclear leukocytes as a biomarker for cutaneous
inflammation.
HUMAN MODELS
Human models for skin irritation testing are species relevant, thereby eliminating the
precarious extrapolation of animal and in vitro data to the human setting. As the required test
area is small, several products or concentrations can be tested simultaneously and compared.
Inclusion of a reference irritant substance facilitates interpretation of the irritant potential of
the test substances. Prior animal or in vitro studies, depending on model relevance and
regulatory issue, can be used to exclude particularly toxic substances or concentrations before
human exposure.
Single-Application Patch Testing
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) (23) outlined a single-application patch test procedure
determining skin irritation in humans. Occlusive patches may be applied to the intrascapular
region of the back or the volar surface of the forearms, using a relatively non-occlusive tape for
new or volatile materials. More occlusive tapes or chambers generally increase the severity of the
responses. A reference material is included in each battery of patches.
The exposure time may vary to suit the study. NAS suggests a four-hour exposure
period, although it may be desirable to test new or volatile materials for 30 minutes to 1 hour.
Studies longer than 24 hours have been performed. Skin responses are evaluated 30 minutes to
1 hour after removal of the patch, using the animal Draize scale (Tabel 2) or similar. Kligman
and Wooding (24) described statistical analysis on test data to calculate the IT50 (time to
produce imitation in 50% of the subjects) and the ID50 (dose required to produce irritation in
50% of the subjects after a 24-hour exposure).
Robinson et al. (25) suggested a four-hour patch test as an alternative to animal testing.
Assessing erythema by visual scoring, they tested a variety of irritants on Caucasians and
Asians. A relative ranking of irritancy was obtained by using 20% SLS as a benchmark.
Taking this model further, McFadden et al. (26) investigated the threshold of skin irritation in
the six different skin types. Again using SLS as a benchmark, they defined the skin irritant
threshold as the lowest concentration of SLS that would produce skin irritation under the
four-hour occluded patch conditions. They found no significant difference in irritation between
the skin types.
Cumulative Irritation Testing
Lanman et al. (27) and Phillips et al. (9) described a cumulative irritation assay, which has
become known as the ‘‘21-day’’ cumulative irritation assay. The purpose of the test was to
screen new formulas before marketing. A 1 in2 of Webril1 was saturated with a liquid of
0.5 g of viscous substances and applied to the surface of the pad to be applied to the skin. The
patch was applied to the upper back and sealed with occlusive tape. The patch was removed
after 24 hours, and then reapplied after examination of the test site. This was repeated for
21 days and the IT50 could then be calculated. Note that the interpretation of the data is
best done by comparing the data to an internal standard for which human clinical experience
exists.
Modifications have been made to this method. The chamber scarification test was
developed to predict the effect of repeated applications of a potential irritant to damaged skin,
rather than healthy skin. The cumulative patch test described above had failed to predict
adverse reactions to skin damaged by acne or shaving, or sensitive areas such as the face (28).
Wigger-Alberti et al. (29) compared two cumulative models by testing skin reaction to
metalworking fluids (MWF). Irritation was assessed by visual scoring, TEWL, and chromametry.
In Vivo Irritation
475

=== Page 493 ===
In the first method, MWF were applied with Finn Chambers1 on the volunteers’ mid-back,
removed after one day of exposure, and reapplied further for two days. In the second method,
cumulative irritant contact dermatitis was induced using a repetitive irritation test for two weeks
(omitting weekends) for six hours per day. The three-day model was preferred because of its
shorter duration and better discrimination of irritancy.
For low-irritancy materials in which discrimination is not defined with visual and
palpatory scores, bioengineering methods (i.e., TEWL) may be helpful.
The Chamber Scarification Test
This test was developed (30,31) to test the irritant potential of products on damaged skin. Six to
eight 1-mm sites on the volar forearm were scratched eight times with a 30-gauge needle,
without causing bleeding. Four scratches were parallel, and the other four were perpendicular
to these. Duhring chambers, containing 0.1 g of test materials (ointments, creams, or powders),
were then placed over the test sites. For liquids, a saturated fitted pad (0.1 mL) may be used.
Chambers containing fresh materials are reapplied daily for three days; the sites are evaluated
by visual scoring 30 minutes after removal of the final set of chambers. A scarification index
may be calculated if both normal and scarified skins are tested to reflect the relative degree of
irritation between compromised and intact skins; this is the score of scarified sites divided by
the score of intact sites. However, the relationship of this assay to routine use of substances
on damaged skin remains to be established. Another compromised skin model, the arm
immersion model of compromised skin, is described in the following immersion tests section.
The Soap Chamber Test
Frosch and Kligman (32) proposed a model to compare the potential of bar soaps to cause
‘‘chapping.’’ Standard patch testing was able to predict erythema, but unable to predict the
dryness, flaking, and fissuring seen clinically. In this method, Duhring chambers fitted with
Webril pads were used to apply 0.1 mL of an 8% soap solution to the human forearm. The
chambers were secured with porous tape, and applied for 24 hours on day 1. On days 2 to 5,
fresh patches were applied for six hours. The skin is examined daily before patch application
and on day 8, the final study day. No patches are applied after day 5. Applications were
discontinued if severe erythema was noted at any point. Reactions were scored on a visual
scale of erythema, scaling, and fissures. This test correlated well with skin-washing procedures,
but tended to overpredict the irritancy of some substances (33).
Immersion Tests
These tests of soaps and detergents were developed to improve irritancy prediction by
mimicking consumer use. Kooyman and Snyder (34) describe a method in which soap
solutions of up to 3% are prepared in troughs. The temperature was maintained at 1058F while
subjects immersed one hand and forearm in each trough, comparing different products (or
concentrations). The exposure period ranged from 10 to 15 minutes, three times each day for
five days, or until irritation was observed in both arms. The antecubital fossa was the first site
to show irritation, followed by the hands (6,34). Therefore, antecubital wash tests and hand
immersion assays were developed (5).
Clarys et al. (35) used a 30-minute/four-day immersion protocol to investigate the effects
of temperature as well as anionic character on the degree of irritation caused by detergents.
The irritation was quantified by assessing the stratum corneum (SC) barrier function (TEWL),
skin redness (a* color parameter), and skin dryness (capacitance method). Although both
detergents tested significantly affected the integrity of the skin, higher anionic content and
temperature increased the irritant response.
Allenby et al. (36) describe the arm immersion model of compromised skin, which is
designed to test the irritant or allergic potential of substances on damaged skin. Such skin may
show an increased response, which may be negligible or undetectable in normal skin. The test
subject immersed one forearm in a solution of 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate for 10 minutes,
twice daily until the degree of erythema reached 1 to 1þ on the visual scale. This degree of
damage corresponded to a morning’s wet domestic work. Patch tests of various irritants were
applied to the dorsal and volar aspects of both the pre-treated and untreated forearms, and
also to the back. Each irritant produced a greater degree of reaction on the compromised skin.
476
Bashir and Maibach

=== Page 494 ===
Wash Tests
Hannuksela and Hannuksela (37) compared the irritant effects of a detergent in use testing and
patch testing. In this study of atopic and non-atopic medical students, each subject washed the
outer aspect of the one forearm with liquid detergent for one minute, twice daily for one week.
Concurrently, a 48-hour chamber patch test of five concentrations of the same detergent was
performed on the upper back. The irritant response was quantified by bioengineering
techniques: TEWL, electrical capacitance, and skin blood flow. In the wash test, atopies and
non-atopics developed irritant contact dermatitis equally, whereas atopies reacted more
readily to the detergent in chamber tests. The disadvantage of the chamber test is that, under
occlusion, the detergent can cause stronger irritation than it would in normal use (38).
Although the wash test simulates normal use of the product being tested, its drawback is a lack
of standard guidelines for performing the test. Charbonnier et al. (39) included squamometry
in their analysis of a hand-washing model of subclinical irritant dermatitis with SLS solutions.
Squamometry showed a significant difference between 0.1% and 0.75% SLS solutions, whereas
visual, subjective, capacitance, TEWL, and chromametry methods were unable to make the
distinction. Charbonnier suggests squamometry as an adjunct to the other bioengineering
methods. Frosch (33) describes an antecubital washing test to evaluate toilet soaps, using two
washing procedures per day. Simple visual scoring of the reaction (erythema and edema)
allows products to be compared. This comparison can be in terms of average score, or number
of washes required to produce an effect.
Assessing Protective Barriers
Zhai et al. (40) proposed a model to evaluate skin protective materials. Ten subjects were
exposed to the irritants, SLS and ammonium hydroxide (in urea), and Rhus allergen. The
occluded test sites were on each forearm, with one control site on each. The irritant response
was assessed visually using a 10-point scale, which included vesiculation and maceration
unlike standard Draize scales. The scores were statistically analyzed for nonparametric data.
Of the barrier creams studied, paraffin wax in cetyl alcohol was found to be the most effective
in preventing irritation.
Wigger-Alberti and Eisner (41) investigated the potential of petrolatum to prevent
epidermal barrier disruption induced by various irritants in a repetitive irritation test. White
petrolatum was applied to the backs of 20 human subjects who were exposed to SLS, NaOH,
toluene, and lactic acid. Irritation was assessed by TEWL and colorimetry in addition to visual
scoring. It was concluded that petrolatum was an effective barrier cream against SLS, NaOH,
and lactic acid, and moderately effective against toluene.
Frosch et al. (7) adapted the guinea pig RIT previously described for use in humans. Two
barrier creams were evaluated for their ability to prevent irritation to SLS. In this repetitive
model, the irritant was applied to the ventral forearm, using a glass cup, for 30 minutes daily
for two weeks. One arm of each subject was pre-treated with a barrier cream. As in the animal
model, erythema was assessed by visual scoring, laser Doppler flow, and TEWL. Skin color
was also measured by colorimetry (La* value). The barrier cream decreased skin irritation to
SLS, the most differentiating parameter being TEWL and the least differentiating being
colorimetry.
Bioengineering Methods in Model Development
Many of the models previously described do not use the modern bioengineering techniques
available, and therefore data based on these models may be imprecise. Despite the skill
in investigations, subjective assessment of erythema, edema, and other visual parameters
may lead to confusion by inter-and intra-observer variation. Although the eye may be more
sensitive than current spectroscopy and chromametric techniques, the reproducibility and
increased statistical power of such data may provide greater benefit. A combination of
techniques, such as TEWL, capacitance, ultrasound, laser Doppler flowmetry, spectroscopy,
and chromametric analysis, in addition to skilled observation may increase the precision
of the test. Andersen and Maibach (42) compared various bioengineering techniques,
finding that clinically indistinguishable reactions induced significantly different changes in
barrier function and vascular status. An outline of many of these techniques is provided by
Patil et al. (5).
In Vivo Irritation
477

=== Page 495 ===
REFERENCES
1. Weltfriend S, Bason M, Lammintausta K, et al. Irritant dermatitis (irritation). In: Marzulli FN,
Maibach HI, eds. Dermatotoxicology. 5th ed. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1996.
2. Draize TH, Woodland G, Calvery HO. Methods for the study of irritation and toxicity of substances
applied to the skin and mucous membranes. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1944; 82:377–390.
3. Code of Federal Regulations. Office of the Federal Registrar, National Archive of Records, General
Services Administration, 1985, title 16, parts 1500.40–1500.42.
4. Patrick E, Maibach HI. Comparison of the time course, dose response and mediators of chemically
induced skin irritation in three species. In: Frosch PJ, et al. eds. Current Topics in Contact Dermatitis.
New York: Springer, 1989:399–402.
5. Patil SM, Patrick E, Maibach HI. Animal, human and in vitro test methods for predicting skin
irritation. In: Marzulli FN, Maibach HI, eds. Dermatotoxicology Methods: The Laboratory Worker’s
Vade Mecum. Washington, D.C.: Taylor & Francis, 1998:89–104.
6. Justice JD, Travers JJ, Vinson LJ. The correlation between animal tests and human tests in assessing
product mildness. Proc Sci Sec Toilet Goods Assoc 1961; 35:12–17.
7. Frosch PJ, Schulze-Dirks A, Hoffmann M, et al. Efficacy of skin barrier creams (I). The repetitive
irritation test (RIT) in the guinea pig. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 28(2):94–100.
8. Frosch PJ, Schulze-Dirks A, Hoffmann M, et al. Efficacy of skin barrier creams (II). Ineffectiveness of a
popular ‘‘skin protector’’ against various irritants in the repetitive irritation test in the guinea pig.
Contact Dermatitis 1993; 29(2):74–77.
9. Phillips L, Steinberg M, Maibach HI, et al. A comparison of rabbit and human skin responses to
certain irritants. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1972; 21:369–382.
10. Wahlberg JE. Measurement of skin fold thickness in the guinea pig. Assessment of edema-inducing
capacity of cutting fluids acids, alkalis, formalin and dimethyl sulfoxide. Contact Dermatitis 1993;
28:141–145.
11. Marzulli FN, Maibach HI. The rabbit as a model for evaluating skin irritants: a comparison of results
obtained on animals and man using repeated skin exposure. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1975; 13:533–540.
12. Anderson C, Sundberg K, Groth O. Animal model for assessment of skin irritancy. Contact Dermatitis
1986; 15:143–151.
13. Opdyke DL, Burnett CM. Practical problems in the evaluation of the safety of cosmetics. Proc Sci Sec
Toilet Goods Assoc 1965; 44:3–4.
14. Calandra J. Comments on the guinea pig immersion test. CTFA Cosmet J 1971; 3(3):47.
15. Opdyke DL. The guinea pig immersion test – a 20 year appraisal. CTFA Cosmet J 1971; 3(3):46–47.
16. MacMillan FSK, Ram RR, Elvers WB. A comparison of the skin irritation produced by cosmetic
ingredients and formulations in the rabbit, guinea pig, beagle dog to that observed in the human. In:
Maibach HI, ed. Animal Models in Dermatology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1975:12–22.
17. Gupta BN, Mathur AK, Srivastava AK, et al. Dermal exposure to detergents. Veterinary Human
Toxicol 1992; 34(5):405–407.
18. Uttley M, Van Abbe NJ. Primary irritation of the skin: mouse ear test and human patch test
procedures. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1973; 24:217–227.
19. Patrick E, Maibach HI. A novel predictive assay in mice. Toxicologist 1987; 7:84.
20. Inoue H, Asaka T, Nagata N, et al. Mechanism of mustard oil-induced skin inflammation in mice. Eur
J Pharmacol 1997; 333(2,3):231–240.
21. Humphrey DM. Measurement of cutaneous microvascular exudates using Evans blue. Biotech
Histochem 1993; 68(6):342–349.
22. Trush MA, Egner PA, Kensler TW. Myeloperoxidase as a biomarker of skin irritation and inflammation.
Food Chem Toxicol 1994; 32(2):143–147.
23. National Academy of Sciences. Committee for the Revision of NAS Publication 1138. Principles and
Procedures for Evaluating the Toxicity of Household Substances. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy of Sciences, 1977:23–59.
24. Kligman AM, Wooding WM. A method for the measurement and evaluation of irritants on human
skin. J Invest Dermatol 1967; 49:78–94.
25. Robinson MK, Perkins MA, Basketter DA. Application of a 4-h human patch test method for
comparative and investigative assessment of skin irritation. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38(4):194–202.
26. McFadden JP, Wakelin SH, Basketter DA. Acute irritation thresholds in subjects with type I-type VI
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38(3):147–149.
27. Lanman BM, Elvers WB, Howard CS. The role of human patch testing in a product development
program. In: Proc. Joint Conf Cosmetic Sciences. Washington, D.C.: Toilet Goods Assoc, 1968:135–145.
28. Battista CW, Rieger MM. Some problems of predictive testing. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1971; 22:349–359.
29. Wigger-Alberti W, Hinnen U, Eisner P. Predictive testing of metalworking fluids: a comparison of 2
cumulative human irritation models and correlation with epidemiological data. Contact Dermatitis
1997; 36(l):14–20.
478
Bashir and Maibach

=== Page 496 ===
30. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. The chamber scarification test for irritancy. Contact Dermatitis 1976; 2:
314–324.
31. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. The chamber scarification test for testing the irritancy of topically applied
substances. In: Drill VA, Lazar P, eds. Cutaneous Toxicity. New York: Academic Press, 1977:150.
32. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. The soap chamber test. A new method for assessing the irritancy of soaps.
J Am Acad Dermatol 1979; 1(1):35–41.
33. Frosch PJ. The irritancy of soap and detergent bars. In: Frost P, Howitz SN, eds. Principles of
Cosmetics for the Dermatologist. St. Louis: C.V. Mosby, 1982:1–12.
34. Kooyman DJ, Snyder FH. The test for mildness of soaps. Arch Dermatol Syphilol 1942; 46:846–855.
35. Clarys P, Manou I, Barel AO. Influence of temperature on irritation in the hand/forearm immersion
test. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 36(5):240–243.
36. Allenby CF, Basketter DA, Dickens A, et al. An arm immersion model of compromised skin (I).
Influence on irritation reactions. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 28(2):84–88.
37. Hannuksela A, Hannuksela M. Irritant effects of a detergent in wash, chamber and repeated open
application tests. Contact Dermatitis 1996; 34(2):134–137.
38. Van der Valk PG, Maibach HI. Post-application occlusion substantially increases the irritant response
of the skin to repeated short-term sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) exposure. Contact Dermatitis 1989; 21(5):
335–338.
39. Charbonnier V, Morrison BM Jr., Paye M, et al. Open application assay in investigation of subclinical
dermatitis induced by sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) in man: advantage of squamometry. Skin Res
Technol 1998; 4:244–250.
40. Zhai H, Willard P, Maibach HI. Evaluating skin-protective materials against contact irritants and
allergens. An in vivo screening human model. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38(3):155–158.
41. Wigger-Alberti W, Eisner P. Petrolatum prevents irritation in a human cumulative exposure model in
vivo. Dermatology 1997; 194(3):247–250.
42. Andersen PH, Maibach HI. Skin irritation in man: a comparative bioengineering study using
improved reflectance spectroscopy. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33(5):315–322.
In Vivo Irritation
479

=== Page 498 ===
45
Noninvasive Clinical Assessment of Skin
Irritation/Inflammation
Michael K. Robinson
Global Biotechnology, The Procter & Gamble Company, Miami Valley Innovation Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
The study of skin biology has been undergoing a transformation over the past 20 years, owing
to advances in technology that permit evaluation of parameters invisible to the naked eye.
Many years ago, Kligman coined the term “invisible dermatoses” to emphasize that what
appears visually normal can be quite abnormal under the skin surface (1). He even suggested
that the future of dermatology would become so reliant on non-visual methods of diagnosis
that the inability to see would not preclude one from a career in the field (2). Evolving
techniques and instrumentation have facilitated the study of many of the skin’s physiological
and biophysical properties, including water content, barrier properties, tensile strength, and
elasticity, and even estimates of melanin, hemoglobin, and collagen. For those interested in the
immune and inflammatory response of the skin, however, instrumental methods have been
less useful.
Surface assessment and grading of inflammatory skin reactions have long relied on
visual methods (3–5). Certain instrumental methods, such as laser doppler flowmetry and
colorimetry, provide some degree of numerical quantification of surface skin reactions that can
supplement simple visual grades (6). However, the detailed study of the cells and molecular
processes underlying skin inflammation has generally required use of highly invasive (e.g.,
biopsy), or moderately invasive (e.g., suction blister), techniques (7–10).
In the mid-1990s, new techniques were introduced to study skin inflammation by
attempting to adsorb molecular mediators of inflammation from the skin surface or within
layers of the stratum corneum. First introduced in the mid-1990s by Japanese investigators, the
approach was to use a relatively mild cellophane tape-stripping method (11) and measure
extracted constitutive cytokine levels (and ratios) in sun-exposed, unexposed, and UV-
irradiated skin. At the time this work first appeared in print, our laboratory was independently
developing and later presented (12,13) and published (14) an even less-invasive approach that
used minimally adhesive Sebutape1 for mediator adsorption. Over the next several years, both
groups reported on the additional application of these procedures for the “targeted proteomic”
detection of inflammatory mediators (cytokines) in various types of compromised skin
conditions and diseases. Other investigators have more recently adopted these techniques,
using somewhat more aggressive tape-stripping techniques to probe cytokine or mRNA
expression patterns at deeper levels of stratum corneum.
CELLOPHANE TAPE ADSORPTION OF PROTEIN MEDIATORS
OF SKIN INFLAMMATION
The original procedure for noninvasive tape adsorption of human skin for assessment of
inflammatory mediators was that of Hirao and coworkers, who used cellophane tape to extract
the constitutive cytokines interleukin-1 alpha (IL-1a) and its competitive inhibitor interleukin-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) from the stratum corneum of sun (UV)-exposed and unexposed
skin (11). Their basic procedure was to cleanse the sampling site with soap and water, tape
strip once with cellophane tape (which was discarded), and re-strip the same site. The second
tape was extracted (sonicated in buffer) and assayed for immunoreactive IL-1a and IL-1ra. The
cytokines were measured directly by enzyme immunoassay as well as by immunoblotting and
functional (induced cell proliferations) assays.

=== Page 499 ===
In comparing sun-exposed (face) and unexposed (inner arm) skin sites, they saw higher
levels of IL-1a on the arm versus face and higher levels of IL-1ra on the face. Levels of both
cytokines were normalized to total recovered protein. The ratio of IL-1ra/IL-1a was
approximately 8 on the arm and >100 on the face. IL-1ra activity and the IL-1ra/IL-1a ratio
were also increased on UV-unexposed back skin for one to four weeks after 2 MED irradiation
of the skin. These results suggested that chronic inflammation due to UV from either natural
sun exposure or UV lamp irradiation was associated with elevated IL-1ra production, perhaps
a regulatory response to IL-1a-induced inflammation and an effort by the skin to quell this
response and restore homeostatic balance.
Two years later, this same laboratory expanded on their initial findings by again
demonstrating increased ratios of IL-1ra/IL-a in inflamed skin (15). In this second study, they
examined involved versus uninvolved skin sites in subjects with psoriasis, atopic dermatitis,
and senile xerosis. Their interest in psoriasis stemmed from earlier findings from Cooper’s
laboratory (using keratomed epidermal skin samples) that involved psoriatic skin had
increased IL-1ra/IL-1a ratios compared with uninvolved skin from the same patients (16). The
tape-stripping procedure they employed in the second study was a slight variation of the
original method insofar as only a single tape application was used.
They confirmed increased IL-1ra/IL-1a ratios in sun-exposed versus unexposed skin and
also observed increased ratios in all of the inflammatory skin conditions versus uninvolved
skin from the same subjects. Because of intersubject variability in the measured cytokine
amounts recovered, not all the comparisons were statistically significant; however, there were
obvious directional changes even for those comparisons that were not significantly different.
Their conclusion from these studies was that an increased IL-1ra/IL-1a ratio in the stratum
corneum represents a nonspecific phenomenon in any inflammatory skin condition; likely
reflecting a regulatory response against unchecked inflammation.
SEBUTAPE ADSORPTION OF PROTEIN MEDIATORS OF SKIN INFLAMMATION
The work of Hirao et al. was unknown to us as we began to investigate the possibility of using
noninvasive tape adsorption methods to assess mediators of skin inflammation back in late
1994. We examined a variety of approaches to this problem, including a variety of tapes,
extraction methods, and mediators of interest. We settled upon Sebutape as the adsorbent tape
of choice for two main reasons. An acrylic polymer film manufactured by CuDerm, this tape
was much less adhesive and adherent to skin than either cellophane tape or another CuDerm
tape product, D-Squame1 (a polyacrylate ester adhesive). Multiple one-minute applications of
Sebutape to the same skin site did not strip off the stratum corneum, unlike the other two
tapes. As noted in our first publications on the method, we obtained complete and quantitative
recovery of spiked cytokine when the Sebutapes were sonicated and vortexed to extract the
material (12,14).
Sebutape turned out to be a very flexible adsorbent tape for our purposes. It could be
applied to overtly inflamed skin (including infant skin) without causing pain on removal. It
could also be applied to mucosal surfaces and trimmed and applied to tight spaces with
limited skin surface area (e.g., scalp skin between parted hairs). Proteins (cytokines) of interest
were assayed by enzyme immunoassay and recoveries were normalized to total protein to
reduce intersubject variability. Figure 1 shows some of the Sebutape application methods used
in our studies.
Reapplication of up to 30 of these tapes to the same area of skin did not produce any
erythema—common with cellophane tape stripping—and also tended to recover similar
amounts of the cytokine IL-1a (Fig. 2) with each application, confirming historical findings that
the stratum corneum acts as a reservoir (sink) for this cytokine (18). No inducible cytokine (IL-8)
was detected even 24 hours after the initial tape collections—again indicating a lack of tape-
induced irritation.
Consistent with the work of Hirao and coworkers, we found a reproducible elevation of
IL-1ra and the IL-1ra/IL-1a ratio on sites of the body (face, lower leg, forearm) that were prone
to sun exposure and lower ratios on generally sun-protected skin sites (upper leg, back,
underarm) (Fig. 3). We also observed elevated IL-1ra/IL-1a ratios and evidence of induced
IL-8 (Fig. 4) on infant skin associated with different types of diaper dermatitis. In contrast, an
482
Robinson

=== Page 500 ===
acute (1 hour) exposure to a high concentration of the irritant surfactant, sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SLS), which is sufficient to produce a weak erythematous response 24 hours after
exposure (5), produced an opposite effect. In this situation, IL-1a (measured 24 hours after the
SLS exposure) was elevated and the IL-1ra/IL-1a ratio was decreased. This indicated that IL-1a
is induced and mobilized in the acute irritation response and that the IL-1ra levels increase
later on; again supporting the role of elevated IL-1ra as a means to regulate more chronic
inflammatory responses.
Figure 1
Photographs of Sebu-
tape1 application to various skin
and mucosal surfaces. Source:
From Ref. 17.
Figure 2
Recovery of IL-1a from Sebutape1 samples collected from the same forearm skin site. Thirty
successive Sebutape samples were collected from the same normal-appearing naive skin site on the lower volar
forearm of four subjects (n ¼ 2 sites/subject). Each bar represents the group mean IL-1a level (SD; n ¼ 8
samples) for each of the 30 SebutapeTM samples collected from each of the two skin sites. The IL-1a/total protein
levels from samples 1 to 30 range between 5 and 15 pg IL-1a/mg total protein. There were no detectable levels of
the inducible cytokine IL-8 (assay sensitivity 10 pg/ml) in any of the tape extracts, including samples collected
24 hours after the initial tape collection. Source: From Ref. 14.
Noninvasive Clinical Assessment of Skin Irritation/Inflammation
483

=== Page 501 ===
Figure 3
Cytokine levels in sun-exposed versus unexposed skin. Sebutape1 samples were collected from different
body sites of adult (aged 18–65 years) male and female subjects with normal-appearing unblemished skin. The ratio of
IL-1ra/IL-1a for sun-exposed facial skin (mean  SD of all sites) and lower leg were significantly higher (*3–6 times,
respectively) than skin that was minimally sun-exposed (upper back, underarm, upper leg). Source: From Ref. 14.
Figure 4
Correlation between skin reactions in diaper
area and IL-8 recovery. Sebutape1 samples were col-
lected from infant skin sites with different rash severity and
from control leg sites. Individual levels of IL-8 for each
subject (n ¼ 28) for control and diaper rash sites (all rash
grades) are shown (A). The normalized IL-8 levels
(B) were significantly higher in rash versus control sites
(* p  0.05; paired Student’s t-test). Source: From Ref. 14.
484
Robinson

=== Page 502 ===
The elevation of the ratio of IL-1ra/IL-1a was a hallmark indicator of every inflammatory
condition (skin or mucosal) that we studied over a period of six years. In addition to our
findings with sun-exposed skin and infant diaper dermatitis noted above, we saw directional
or significant elevation in this ratio in dandruff and seborrheic scalp dermatitis (19) (Fig. 5).
Seborrheic dermatitis and dandruff were also associated with elevated recovery of the
inducible immune or inflammatory cytokines IL-2 and TNF-a, respectively. Rosacea, an
inflammatory skin condition (20), with known cytokine involvement (21,22) was also shown to
be associated with elevated IL-1ra/IL-1a ratios (23) (Fig. 6). Involved skin sites showed
elevated ratios compared with uninvolved skin sites from the same subjects. However, even
the uninvolved sites showed slightly elevated ratios compared with facial skin sites sampled
from normal control subjects.
In addition to our work on skin and overt inflammatory conditions, we expanded this
technique to other realms of the inflammatory response. A common technique for the study of
oral inflammation (e.g, gingivitis) is to try to recover small amounts of gingival fluid for assay.
As shown in Figure 1, we were able to apply Sebutape over the gum surface and adsorb
cytokines as an alternative, a somewhat simpler method (24). The objective of the study was to
examine the relationship between changes in cytokine levels and clinical inflammation.
Subjects participated in a 14-day experimental gingivitis (EG) model, where five days
following a dental prophylaxis subjects refrained from all oral hygiene measures for 14 days. A
gingivitis index (GI) and gingival bleeding were assessed clinically by standard techniques.
Sebutape samples of each subject’s gingival surface were collected from the right posterior
buccal quadrant at baseline (pre-EG) and day 14 (post-EG). The tapes were analyzed for both
IL-1a and IL-1b. Over a 14-day EG period, statistically significant (p < 0.05) increases in GI,
gingival bleeding, and IL-1a (Fig. 7) were observed. A directional increase in IL-1b was also
observed.
Figure 5
The ratio of IL-1ra/IL-1a normal-
ized to total protein was significantly
increased in the seborrheic dermatitis scalp
group compared with normal scalp controls.
The dandruff group approached significance
when compared with the normal scalp group.
Source: From Ref. 19.
Figure 6
The ratios of normalized interleu-
kin-1ra/interleukin-1a were determined for
rosacea subjects (involved and noninvolved
control sites) and normal subjects. Source:
From Ref. 22.
Noninvasive Clinical Assessment of Skin Irritation/Inflammation
485

=== Page 503 ===
A final adaptation of this method was to try and identify skin surface biomarkers that
could be associated with, and diagnostic of, neurosensory skin irritation. Because sensory
irritation is purely symptomatic in nature, we applied this technique to see if a more objective
index of the response could be developed through the Sebutape biomarker adsorption method.
Though we were unable to completely investigate this hypothesis, we did have some early
success in demonstrating reduced nitric oxide (NO) recoveries from the skin of test subjects
experiencing weak-to-moderate stinging responses to lactic acid or capsaicin (25). Looking at
cytokine recoveries, we also saw reduced IL-1ra levels in dandruff subjects after one and two
weeks use of an antidandruff shampoos versus a placebo shampoo. This reduction was seen in
parallel with a reduction in scalp itch symptoms (unpublished). Assuming that the
antidandruff shampoo active was effective in helping to quell the inflammatory response in
the scalp, this reduction in IL-1ra is consistent with its role in downmodulating the Il-1a
triggered inflammatory response. A reduction in inflammation due to shampoo treatment
would likely result in lower endogenous IL-1a and a resultant reduction in IL-1ra.
RECENT ADAPTATIONS OF SKIN TAPE APPLICATION METHODS FOR
ASSESSMENT OF STRUCTURAL AND INFLAMMATORY PROTEINS AND GENE
EXPRESSION PROFILING
A source of frustration surrounding our early work in this area was the need to run individual
immunoassays on each protein of interest. This limited the number of analyses that could be
run on each sample. More recently, multiplex immunoassays (e.g., Luminex beads) or assay
services (e.g., Rules-Based Medicine, Austin, TX) have opened the door to more extensive
analysis of adsorbed proteins or other biomarkers. One such application, looking at structural
skin proteins and serological markers, was recently published by Hendrix et al. (26). They
used D-Squame tapes to adsorb and quantify structural proteins (involucrin, fibronectin,
keratins-1, -6, and -10) and plasma biomarkers (cortisol, human serum albumin) from healthy
forearm skin. They used a multi-analyte-profiling method, SkinMAPTM (Linco Research, St.
Charles, MO). This initial study defined study design and extraction procedures for future
work. It is likely that cytokine analysis will also be forthcoming via this method.
A recent study from the Netherlands used a more aggressive tape-stripping method
with several different types of tape (including D-Squame) and examined baseline and SLS-
induced cytokine recovery at three different levels from the outer stratum corneum to the
lower stratum corneum just above the viable epidermis (27). Similar to our findings, they
reported increased IL-1ra (and IL-1ra/IL-1a ratios) in chronically irritated (SLS-exposed)
skin. This increase was consistent across all levels of the stratum corneum. A slight increase
in IL-8 was also observed.
Figure 7
Sebutape samples were collected from 10 adult clinical subjects in an experimental gingivitis (EG)
model. Baseline samples were collected 5 days after dental prophylaxis (black bar) and then after 14 days of EG
(gray bar). Samples were extracted in saline and analyzed for IL-1a.
486
Robinson

=== Page 504 ===
Another application of tape stripping of skin has been to recover mRNA fragments that
code for inflammatory or other proteins. Morhenn et al. first reported on this technique in 1999,
showing differential recoveries of RNAs coding for the cytokines IL-4 and IL-8 and the
enzyme-inducible nitric oxide synthase (28). They recovered the RNA from multiple (up to 23)
D-Squame tape strips of the skin and used a ribonuclease protection assay for detection and
quantification. They showed distinctly elevated recoveries of RNA for all three proteins from
allergic contact dermatitis skin sites versus irritant contact dermatitis skin sites. Later, using a
more limited four-repeated tape-stripping procedure, they recovered and amplified mRNA
from normal and SLS-irritated skin and examined gene expression profiles via microarray
analysis (29). They demonstrated significantly altered expression in over 1700 genes as the
result of SLS-induced skin irritation. In similar fashion, Benson et al. (30) used four tape strips
from psoriatic skin sites or non-lesion sites and measured cytokine and keratin protein
recoveries via RT-PCR analysis. Using this approach, they detected changes (overexpression)
in biomarkers that were distinct from those seen via biopsy procedures and felt that the more
noninvasive approach was a useful adjunct for the study of this disease.
CONCLUSION
The ability to study the inflammatory response of the skin has traditionally relied on invasive
techniques to collect cells and mediators of this complex response. Skin surface adsorption of
biomarkers of inflammation certainly does not tell the entire story of the underlying
inflammatory processes. By the simple fact that adsorption is from the surface of the nonviable
stratum corneum, the molecules collected were derived from earlier synthetic processes in
response to some stimulus. This may make it difficult to easily discern (from the absorbed
molecule profiles) the exact nature or mechanisms of acute inflammatory responses. However,
chronic conditions or diseases, for which the molecular responses are ongoing, are much more
assessable by this approach. The consistent finding (from multiple skin conditions, diseases,
and across several laboratories over the years) of elevated IL-1ra/IL-1a ratios is a testament to
the validity and utility of the approach and the value of noninvasive tape adsorption of
biomarkers as a means to detect, differentially diagnose, and evaluate inflammatory skin
conditions.
REFERENCES
1. Kligman AM. The invisible dermatoses. Arch Dermatol 1991; 127:1375–1382.
2. Kligman AM. Perspectives on bioengineering of the skin. In: Serup J, Jemec GB, eds. Handbook of
Noninvasive Methods and The Skin. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 1995; 3–8.
3. Stotts J. Planning, conduct, and interpretation of human predictive sensitization patch tests. In: Drill
VA, Lazar P, eds. Current Concepts in Cutaneous Toxicity. New York, NY: Academic Press, 1980; 41–53.
4. Fregert S. Manual of contact dermatitis. 2nd ed. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publisher, 1981.
5. Robinson MK, Perkins MA, Basketter DA. Application of a 4-h human patch test method for
comparative and investigative assessment of skin irritation. Contact Dermat 1998; 38:194–202.
6. Serup J, Jemec GBE. Handbook of noninvasive methods and the skin. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995.
7. Gerberick GF, Rheins LA, Ryan CA, et al. Increases in human epidermal DR(þ)CD1(þ), DR(þ)CD1()
CD36(þ), and DR()CD3(þ) cells in allergic versus irritant patch test responses. J Invest Dermatol
1994; 103:524–529.
8. Arestides RSS, He HZ, Westlake RM, et al. Costimulatory molecule OX40L is critical for both Th1 and
Th2 responses in allergic inflammation. Eur J Immunol 2002; 32:2874–2880.
9. Nickoloff BJ, Naidu Y. Perturbation of epidermal barrier function correlates with initiation of cytokine
cascade in human skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994; 30:535–546.
10. Ryan CA, Gerberick GF. Cytokine mRNA expression in human epidermis after patch treatment with
rhus and sodium lauryl sulfate. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1999; 10:127–135.
11. Hirao T, Aoki H, Yoshida T, et al. Elevation of interleukin 1 receptor antagonist in the stratum
corneum of sun-exposed and ultraviolet B- irradiated human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1996;
106:1102–1107.
12. Perkins MA, Farage MA, Wong TK, et al. Development of a noninvasive method for assessing human
skin irritation. Fundam Appl Toxicol 1997; 36:365.
13. Perkins MA, Osterhues MA, Robinson MK. Noninvasive method for assessing inflammatory changes
in chemically treated human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1999; 112:601.
Noninvasive Clinical Assessment of Skin Irritation/Inflammation
487

=== Page 505 ===
14. Perkins MA, Osterhues MA, Farage MA, et al. A noninvasive method to assess skin irritation and
compromised skin conditions using simple tape adsorption of molecular markers of inflammation.
Skin Res Technol 2001; 7:227–237.
15. Terui T, Hirao T, Sato Y, et al. An increased ratio of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist to interleukin-1
alpha in inflammatory skin diseases. Exp Dermatol 1998; 7:327–334.
16. Hammerberg C, Arend WP, Fisher GJ, et al. Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist in normal and psoriatic
epidermis. J Clin Invest 1992; 90:571–583.
17. Robinson MK, Perkins MA. A strategy for skin irritation testing. Am J Contact Dermat 2002; 13:21–29.
18. Gahring LC, Buckley A, Daynes RA. Presence of epidermal-derived thymocyte activating factor/
interleukin 1 in normal human stratum corneum. J Clin Invest 1985; 76:1585–1591.
19. Perkins MA, Cardin CW, Osterhues MA, et al. A non-invasive tape absorption method for recovery of
inflammatory mediators to differentiate normal from compromised scalp conditions. Skin Res
Technol 2002; 8:187–193.
20. Helm KF, Menz J, Gibson LE, et al. A clinical and histopathologic study of granulomatous rosacea. J
Am Acad Dermatol 1991; 25:1038–1043.
21. Barton K, Monroy DC, Nava A, et al. Inflammatory cytokines in the tears of patients with ocular
rosacea. Ophthalmology 1997; 104:1868–1874.
22. Bamford JT. Rosacea: current thoughts on origin. Semin Cutan Med Surg 2001; 20:199–206.
23. Robinson MK, Schwartz JF, Perkins MA. Application of a novel and noninvasive skin sampling
technique for analyzing cytokine-mediated inflammation in rosacea. J Toxicol Cutan Ocul Toxicol
2003; 22:13–22.
24. Perkins MA, Biesbrock AR, Robinson MK, et al. Reapplication of a novel noninvasive method for
assessing the relationship of gingival inflammation and bleeding to gingival epithelium cytokine
concentrations. Toxicol Sci 1999; 48:53.
25. Perkins MA, Osterhues MA, Vogelpohl S, et al. A clinical skin sampling approach to asses sensory
skin irritation. Toxicol Sci 2000; 54:146.
26. Hendrix SW, Miller KH, Youket TE, et al. Optimization of the skin multiple analyte profile
bioanalytical method for determination of skin biomarkers from D-Squame“ tape samples. Skin Res
Technol 2007; 13:330–342.
27. De Jongh CM, Verberk MM, Spiekstra SW, et al. Cytokines at different stratum corneum levels in
normal and sodium lauryl sulphate-irritated skin. Skin Res Technol 2007; 13:390–398.
28. Morhenn VB, Chang EY, Rheins LA. A noninvasive method for quantifying and distinguishing
inflammatory skin reactions. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999; 41:687–692.
29. Wong R, Tran V, Morhenn V, et al. Use of RT-PCR and DNA microarrays to characterize RNA
recovered by non-invasive tape harvesting of normal and inflamed skin. J Invest Dermatol 2004;
123:159–167.
30. Benson NR, Papenfuss J, Wong R, et al. An analysis of select pathogenic messages in lesional and non-
lesional psoriatic skin using non-invasive tape harvesting. J Invest Dermatol 2006; 126:2234–2241.
488
Robinson

=== Page 506 ===
46
Detecting Skin Irritation Using Enhanced Visual
Scoring: A Sensitive New Clinical Methoda
Miranda A. Farage
Feminine Clinical Sciences Innovation Center, The Procter & Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Skin testing on panels of volunteer human subjects to confirm that a new material is
nonirritating is a routine part of the overall product safety assessment. Tests to assess irritation
range from standard occluded patch tests to tests that exaggerate the concentrations of actual
expected exposures. Currently, these tests rely mainly on unaided visual scoring of erythema
to determine the degree of irritation.
As with any other type of inflammatory reaction, skin irritation triggers a series of events
involving subsurface dilatation of blood vessels with an influx of inflammatory cells.
Subsequently, erythema (along with possible swelling and heat) appears on the skin surface.
However, by the time consumer products being developed reach the stage when they can be
safely and ethically tested on human volunteers, products and ingredients that may cause
frank irritation have been eliminated. The resulting products are virtually nonirritating and
produce, at most, very minor visual changes, even under conditions of highly exaggerated
exposures. This presents a difficult challenge when trying to differentiate between the
potential skin effects of two closely related products. [For a more complete discussion on
irritation, see Chew and Maibach (1).]
Recently, we evaluated the effectiveness of a polarized light visualization system that
uses both parallel- and cross-polarized light. Our goal was to determine if enhanced visual
scoring using a polarized light visualization tool would enable us to detect subclinical irritation,
i.e., changes that occur before irritation is obvious to the unaided eye, or changes that may still be
present after visible changes have resolved. If successful, this would lead to (i) increased
sensitivity of our testing program enabling us to differentiate between very mild test products, (ii)
improved claims support, and (iii) better guidance in our product development efforts. It would
also enable us to design tests that use fewer exposures of shorter duration, resulting in programs
that are less costly and cause less discomfort to our panels of volunteer subjects.
PROCEDURE
Two basic test designs were used: the standard patch test and the behind-the-knee (BTK) test.
Typically, these tests would be conducted as a part of routine evaluation of the potential
irritant properties of a material. The patch test measures the potential for irritation due to the
chemical structure of a material (i.e., chemical irritation). The BTK test measures both chemical
irritation and the potential for mechanical irritation due to friction (2–4). Scoring was
conducted to compare unaided visual scoring to enhance visual scoring with a polarized light
visualization system.
The test materials consisted of low concentrations of Sodium Lauryl Sulfate (SLS) and
two currently marketed brands of feminine hygiene pads. Pad A is a standard pad with an
absorbent core and a fabric-like, polyethylene film top sheet. Pad B is a standard pad with an
absorbent core and a nonwoven fabric top sheet. These products are similar in their potential
to cause irritation, yet consumers prefer product B over product A due to the absence of
adverse skin sensations.
aSame parts Adapted from Farage MA. Enhancement of visual scoring of skin irritant reactions using cross-
polarized and parallel polarized light. Contact Dermatitis 2007; 57: 1–9. (With kind permission from Blackwell
Publishing Group.)

=== Page 507 ===
For each study, the protocol was approved by the test facility’s institutional review
board. Participants in all the studies were healthy adult volunteers aged 18 to 65 years who
had signed an informed consent. Subjects could withdraw from the study at any time. The
studies were conducted in compliance with the Good Clinical Practices regulations as
prescribed by the Food and Drug Administration (5).
All subjects had very sensitive to moderately sun-sensitive skin (types I–IV) according to
Fitzpatrick’s classifications (6). Subjects were excluded from participation if they (i) had
sunburn, acne, scar tissue, dermatitis, or any other skin abnormality at the test sites, (ii) were
taking anti-inflammatory corticosteroids or other medications that may interfere with test
results, (iii) had participated in an arm patch test within the last four weeks, (iv) had diabetes
or any medical condition that might compromise the immune system, or (v) were pregnant.
Subjects were instructed to refrain from using lotions, creams, or any other skin preparation in
the test area; to refrain from swimming and tanning/sun exposure; and to refrain from taking
any anti-inflammatory, anti-histamine, and/or steroid medications while participating in the
study.
Test materials were applied as follows.
Testing on the Upper Arms and Lower Forearms
Standard patch testing has been described previously (3). Samples were applied using an
occlusive, nonwoven cotton pad (Webril patch, Professional Medical Products Company,
Kendall LTP, Chicopee, Massachusetts). The adhesive was reinforced with an occlusive,
hypoallergenic tape [Blenderm occlusive tape (3M Health Care, St. Paul, Minnesota)]. On the
upper arm, patches were applied lengthwise midway between the shoulder and the elbow on
the lateral surface, with a minimum of 2-cm space between patches. On the lower forearm,
patches were applied lengthwise to the volar surface midway between the elbow and the wrist.
In the first experiment, samples were applied to the upper arm for 24 hr/day for three
consecutive days. In the second experiment, patches were applied to both the upper arm and
the lower forearm for either 2 or 6 hr/day for two consecutive days.
Patch sites for the different test materials were rotated among subjects. Separate patches
were applied for sites that would be scored visually and sites that would be scored using the
visualization instrument to avoid bias that might be introduced inadvertently by repeated
grading of a specific site. Patch sites were marked with 0.5% gentian violet to aid in visual
grading and to ensure that the patches were applied to identical sites each day for the duration
of the test. Panelists were instructed to remove the patches at specific times and to return to the
laboratory for grading and/or reapplication of test materials 30 to 60 minutes later. Further
details of each experiment are included in the appropriate figure legend.
BTK Testing
The protocol was a modification of the BTK test described previously (2–4). The test material
was placed horizontally and held in place behind the knee by an elastic knee band of
appropriate size. Test materials were removed by the panelists 30 to 60 minutes prior to
returning to the laboratory for grading and/or reapplication of materials. Samples were left in
place for six hours each day, for four consecutive days.
Grading was conducted prior to the first patch application (i.e., baseline), and 30 to
60 minutes after removal of each patch (upper arm or lower forearm) or BTK application (i.e.,
“post patch”). In the BTK and short duration patches (2 or 6 hours on the upper arm or lower
forearm), scoring was also conducted the following morning after sample removal, prior to the
next sample application (i.e., “recovery”).
Standard visual grading was done by a trained, expert grader under a 60 to 100 watt
incandescent daylight blue bulb. Enhanced visual grading was conducted using a polarized
light visualization system (Syris v6001 Visualization System, Syris Scientific, LLC, Gray,
Maine; available at: www.syrisscientific.com) with separate scores recorded for parallel-
polarizing illumination (surface mode) followed by cross-polarizing illumination (subsurface
mode). The subsurface mode allows visualization of the site at a depth of 1 mm beneath the
surface.
Erythema was graded according to a previously described scale of “0” to “4”, where 0 is
no apparent cutaneous involvement and 4 is moderate-to-severe, spreading erythema and/or
edema (2). The same grader was used throughout an experiment, and the grader was not
490
Farage

=== Page 508 ===
aware of the treatment assignments. If a test site exhibited a grade of “2” or greater, the test
material was not reapplied at that site. However, the site was graded until completion of the
test. Any test site showing a grade of 2 or more at the final grading timepoint was followed
until the response regressed to a “1.5” or less.
For the BTK test, panelists kept a daily diary of skin problems experienced at the test
sites, as described previously (7,8). Panelists were asked if they experienced any of the
following sensations: the sample rubbing against the skin, the sample sticking to the skin,
chafing, burning, itching, pain, edema, or any other discomfort. Results were evaluated for a
higher occurrence of each individual skin problem with one treatment versus another.
Stratified CMH (Cochran-Mentel-Haenszel) comparisons were used to evaluate
erythema scores, unless otherwise indicated. For sensory effects, treatment comparisons
were evaluated using McNemar’s test. Results of the statistical analyses conducted for each
experiment are described in the appropriate figure legend.
SKIN IRRITATION ASSESSMENT
In the standard 24h-patch test: grades using polarized and cross-polarized light were similar to the
grades resulting from standard visual assessment. The mean erythema grade after the first 24-hour
patch application to the upper arm was statistically significantly different from the baseline grade for
all three grading methods (visual, subsurface using cross-polarized light, and surface using parallel-
polarized light) (Fig. 1). For all test concentrations of SLS (0%, 0.025%, 0.05%, and 0.1%), the mean
erythema remained significantly elevated over baseline grade with subsequent patch applications. A
repeat experiment using 24-hour patches of SLS at concentrations of 0.01% and 0.1% on the upper
arm and 0.01% on the volar surface of the forearm showed similar results (data not shown).
Enhanced visual grading was more effective in detecting very minor irritation. Patch tests
were conducted on the upper and lower arm under conditions that produce very low levels of
irritation (e.g., concentrations of SLS of 0.01% and patch test exposures of 2 and 6 hours). Grading
with cross-polarized light (subsurface grading) detected statistically significant increases in mean
erythema compared with baseline after a single patch application for two hours or six hours on the
forearm (Fig. 2A), and for six hours on the upper arm (Fig. 2B). With a patch exposure of two
hours on the upper arm, the increase in subsurface erythema was not significant immediately after
patch removal, but was significant after 22 hours of recovery (i.e., recovery 1).
Figure 1
Standard visual and enhanced visual grading (24-hour patch test on the upper arm). Test samples in
the 24-hour patch test consisted of saline, 0.025%, 0.05%, and 0.1% SLS. Panelists (13–14 per group) were
patched on the upper arm for 24 hr/day for three consecutive days. Scoring was conducted at baseline (prior to
treatment), and 30 to 60 minutes after removal of each patch (post patch 1–3). The graph plots mean erythema
(S.E.) at each scoring timepoint. Stratified CMH comparisons were used to evaluate visual scores for 0.05% and
0.1% SLS. ANCOVA was used for all other treatments. For all treatments, visual, subsurface and surface scores
after patches 1 to 3 were significantly elevated over baseline (p  0.05, not shown on graph). Abbreviation: CMH,
Cochran-Mentel-Haenszel; ANCOVA, analysis of Co-variance.
Detecting Skin Irritation Using Enhanced Visual Scoring
491

=== Page 509 ===
Similar results were obtained using 0.03% SLS, with patches applied for two and six
hours (data not shown). Irritation was apparent earlier with the subsurface scoring (upper
arm) and tended to remain elevated, even after overnight recovery.
Enhanced visual grading increased the ability to differentiate between two similar
products in the BTK test. At the afternoon scoring, conducted immediately after removal of the
first test sample (i.e., post–patch 1 scoring), the subsurface scores for the two products were
significantly different and remained different for the subsequent post-patch scoring times. This
difference was apparent using unaided visual scoring and surface scoring (Fig. 3A and C), and
the subsurface assessment using cross-polarized light (Fig. 3B). However, at the scoring after
the test sites recovered overnight (i.e., recovery scoring), significant differences between the
two products were not apparent until after the third application for the visual scoring
(recovery 3, Fig. 3D) and after second application for surface scoring (recovery 2, Fig. 3F).
Subsurface scoring showed the products to be significantly different after one single
application (Fig. 3E).
Enhanced visual grading results were consistent with sensory effects in the BTK test. Test
panelists’ diaries enabled evaluation of sensory effects. With every sample application,
significantly more individuals reported burning sensations with pad A compared with pad B
(Fig. 4). In addition, a significantly higher number of individuals reported pain with pad A
during the third sample application and the sensation of the sample sticking to the skin during
the second and third applications (data not shown).
Figure 2
Standard visual and enhanced
visual grading using very mild conditions in
the patch test (lower forearm and upper
arm). Multiple patches of the 0.01% SLS
were applied to both (A) the forearm and
(B) upper arm for two consecutive days
(14 panelists per group). Patches were
removed after two hours or six hours.
Scoring was conducted at baseline, 30 to
60 minutes after removal of each patch (post
patch 1–2), and the morning following each
patch removal (recovery 1–2). The graph plots
mean erythema (S.E.) at each scoring
timepoint. Results were evaluated using the
stratified CMH test. (*Significant difference
from baseline, p  0.05). Abbreviation: CMH,
Cochran-Mentel-Haenszel.
492
Farage

=== Page 510 ===
Figure 3
Standard visual and enhanced visual grading using two similar products in the BTK. Two feminine
protection products (pad A and pad B) were evaluated in the BTK. Samples were applied for 6 hr/day for four
consecutive days (14–16 panelists per group). Scoring was conducted at baseline, 30 to 60 minutes after removal
of each patch (post patch 1-4, A–C), and the morning following each patch removal (recovery 1–4, D–F). The
graph plots mean erythema (S.E.) at each scoring timepoint. Treatment comparisons were evaluated using the
stratified CMH test. (*Significant difference between pad A and pad B, p  0.05). Pad A ¼ open symbols. Pad B ¼
closed symbols. Abbreviations: BTK, behind-the-knee; CMH, Cochran-Mentel-Haenszel.
Detecting Skin Irritation Using Enhanced Visual Scoring
493

=== Page 511 ===
DISCUSSION
Evaluating the potential for skin irritation is an important step in assuring the safety of many
consumer products. Visual grading of erythema has been used reliably for many years to
detect skin irritation in a variety of test protocols and on various body sites. It requires no
special equipment and is easily adaptable to large-scale testing, which is required to provide
safety assurance for consumer products. Trained skin graders can accurately and reproducibly
score test sites for erythema and dryness (9) and reliably detect evidence of irritation with
equal or higher degrees of sensitivity to that of instrumental measures (10–14). However,
enhanced visual scoring may increase the ability to differentiate very similar products without
requiring other protocol modifications. In addition, by continuing to use erythema as a signal
for skin irritation, we can compare data on new materials and products with a large, historical
data set.
Current test methods were developed so a grader would see a reaction with the unaided
eye. However, physiological changes that occur early in the process of irritation, such as
changes in blood flow, moisture content, and pH, would be expected to occur before any
reaction is visible. In other words, by the time the reaction is visible, it may be too late to
measure the early changes in skin physiology. These early changes may be key to our ability to
distinguish subtle skin effects and, therefore, support future product development efforts.
When skin reactions are scored visually, the grader is seeing a combination of endpoints:
the surface changes, which provide information about the shape and texture of the skin
surface, and the subsurface changes, which provide information about internal components
such as erythema, pigmentation, and the vasculature (15,16). Polarized light sources can enable
the observer to selectively examine either the surface or subsurface components.
Authors have described the use of polarized light as an aid in visualizing various skin
conditions, including acne vulgaris, rosacea, photoaging, lentigo simplex, and basal cell
carcinoma (17–19). Kollias et al. (20) studied irritation reactions in individuals’ patch tested
with various concentrations of SLS. After 24 hours of patch testing, test sites were
photographed with standard and perpendicular polarized (or cross polarized) light 20
minutes, 24, and 48 hours after patch removal. Visible erythema was evaluated on both sets of
photographs. These authors found that erythema was apparent at the 20-minute photograph
and persisted for the next 48 hours.
We conducted these studies to determine if the use of cross-polarized light would
increase the sensitivity of our scoring and allow us to detect reactions that were not apparent
with unaided visual grading. In the first experiment, the standard, 24-hour patch test to the
upper arm was used (Fig. 1). The low concentrations of SLS produced very low levels of
irritation, as indicated by the relatively low mean erythema scores. All concentrations,
Figure 4
Reports of burning sensations in the BTK. In the BTK, each of the 30 panelists was asked to keep a
daily diary of skin problems experienced at the test sites. Results were evaluated for a higher occurrence of each
individual skin problem with one treatment versus another. The graph plots the number of subjects reporting
sensations of burning at the test sites during each patch application. Treatment comparisons were evaluated using
McNemar’s test. (**Significant difference between pad A and pad B, p < 0.001). (*Significant difference between
pad A and pad B, p < 0.05). Pad A ¼ open symbols. Pad B ¼ closed symbols. Abbreviation: BTK, behind-the-knee.
494
Farage

=== Page 512 ===
including saline alone, were sufficient to produce enough erythema so that the results were
significantly different from the pre-patch (baseline) scores after the first 24-hour patch.
Evaluation of irritation reactions by expert graders has been used very effectively for
decades in protocols designed to investigate skin effects (10,13,21–25). In an earlier publication,
we conducted direct comparisons between visual scoring and instrumental scoring methods
[TEWL using a ServoMed Evaporimeter EP11(Servomed AB, Stockholm, Sweden), and
redness using a Minolta Chromameter CR-2001(Minolta Corp., U.S.)] (26). The results of the
visual scoring method were very similar to those of the instrumental scoring methods.
Significant differences between treatments and scoring timepoints of visual scores were very
consistent with those observed with the instrumental scores. The results presented in Figure 1
provide a comparison with an instrument designed to enhance visual scoring (Syris v6001
Visualization System). Once again, results are very consistent and confirm that an expert
grader can detect very low levels of irritation. Results of the experiment presented in Figure 1
indicated that, although the test conditions were mild, the 24-hour patch on the upper arm
produced irritation reactions that were already visually apparent, i.e., the reactions were not
subclinical. Therefore, a subsequent experiment was designed using even milder conditions in
an attempt to produce subclinical changes.
Results of the milder patch conditions (Fig. 2) demonstrated that, using enhanced visual
scoring, irritant effects were apparent at certain timepoints in the study when standard visual
scoring showed no significant effect. A low concentration of SLS (0.01%) was patched for very
brief periods (2 hours and 6 hours). On the upper arm, the test conditions did not produce
significant visible erythema until after the second patch. However, grading the subsurface
reactions using cross-polarized light demonstrated significant erythema after removal of the
first 6-hour patch, or 24 hours earlier (Fig. 2B).
When 0.01% SLS was patched on the volar forearms, the mean erythema was
significantly different from baseline after a single patch using both standard visual scoring
and cross-polarized light (subsurface) scoring. However, using standard visual scoring, the
erythema disappeared with an overnight recovery (Fig. 2A, recovery 1). Yet, using cross-
polarized light showed that subsurface changes in erythema were still present under the skin
surface. The ability of the enhanced visual scoring to detect subclinical irritation may indicate
that the use of this tool has the potential to increase the sensitivity of standard tests.
The results shown in Figure 3 demonstrate the challenge in detecting differences in the
potential for irritant effects between two very similar products and the potential usefulness of
the enhanced visual scoring. Pads A and B produce indistinguishable irritant reactions when
tested in the standard 24-hour patch test on the upper arm. However, consumers and panelists
who participate in skin effects’ studies with these two products consistently report a higher
number of unpleasant sensations, i.e., itching, sticking, etc., associated with pad A (7,8). The
BTK test, which was developed to evaluate the potential for both chemical and mechanical
irritation, has been the only test method to consistently detect a difference in the irritation
potential of these two products (3,7).
In this study, we also demonstrated a significant difference between these two products
after the first six-hour application in the BTK test (Fig. 3A–C). However, after an overnight
recovery period, the difference between erythema using the standard visual scoring method
was no longer significant (Fig. 3D). Using cross-polarized light to grade the subsurface
reactions, the changes in erythema produced by pads A and B remained statistically
significantly different, even after overnight recovery.
Enhanced visual scoring enables detection of subclinical physiological changes that are
not apparent using standard visual scoring. We have reported previously that subjective
consumer comments indicate that consumers can detect differences in skin effects caused by
the use of two similar products. For example, consumers have consistently indicated that pad
B is seen as less irritating than pad A in “real use” situations; however, most test protocols
repeatedly fail to differentiate between these two products (3). The BTK test, which was
developed to further exaggerate exposure due to the mechanical irritation component, is the
only protocol that consistently differentiates between these two products.
Sensory effects have been shown to be consistent with BTK test results and to
differentiate between pad A and pad B reliably (8). This current investigation confirms that
sensory effects correlate with visual scoring in the BTK test and confirms that sensory effects
enable the differentiation between two very similar products (Fig. 4). With enhanced visual
Detecting Skin Irritation Using Enhanced Visual Scoring
495

=== Page 513 ===
scoring, we can begin to bridge the gap in sensitivity between sensory effects and physiological
changes that can be evaluated by an external observer.
The ability of enhanced visual scoring to detect irritant-related changes, even when
standard visual scoring indicates recovery of the skin, has important implications for testing
protocols. Currently, standard protocols on potential skin effects do not focus on recovery. It is
assumed that a resolution of the erythema and other visual changes indicate an end to the
irritant reaction. However, with enhanced visual scoring, subclinical changes are still evident,
even with the mild reactions seen in this series of experiments. Future protocols can be
designed to follow the subsurface changes to their resolution more effectively and to provide a
clearer understanding of the process of skin healing.
CONCLUSIONS
We have developed a new innovative clinical method with several advantages:
l Subclinical skin irritation can be detected using enhanced visual scoring.
l Enhanced visual scoring indicates that subsurface changes to the skin persist, even
when standard visual scoring indicates recovery.
l Enhanced visual scoring has the potential to increase the sensitivity of our clinical
studies by detecting changes that are not apparent with standard visual scoring.
l Skin irritation is apparent with fewer applications of the test material. This may
allow development of shorter protocols for evaluating the skin effects of consumer
products.
l Enhanced visual scoring has the potential to bridge the gap in sensitivity between
sensory effects experienced by the consumer and physiological changes that can be
evaluated by an external observer.
This new method has the potential to increase the sensitivity of all clinical dermatological
studies.
REFERENCES
1. Chew A-L, Maibach HI, eds. Irritant Dermatitis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2006.
2. Farage MA, Gilpin D, Enane NA, et al. Development of a new test for mechanical irritation: behind
the knee as a test site. Skin Res Technol 2001; 7:193–203.
3. Farage MA, Meyer SJ, Walter D. Development of a sensitive test method to evaluate mechanical
irritation potential on mucosal skin. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:85–95.
4. Farage MA. The Behind-the-Knee test: an efficient model for evaluating mechanical and chemical
irritation. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12:73–82.
5. Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 Section 10.90, 50, 56, and 812.
6. Fitzpatrick TB. The validity and practicality of sun-reactive skin types I through VI. Arch Dermatol
1988; 124:869–871.
7. Farage MA, Meyer S, Walter D. Evaluation of modifications of the traditional patch test in assessing
the chemical irritation potential of feminine hygiene products. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:73–84.
8. Farage MA, Santana MV, Henley E. Correlating sensory effects with irritation. Cutan Ocul Toxicol
2005; 24:45–52.
9. Griffiths HA, Wilhelm KP, Robinson MK, et al. Interlaboratory evaluation of a human patch test for
the identification of skin irritation potential/hazard. Food Chem Toxicol 1997; 35:255–260.
10. Magnusson BM, Koskinen LO. Effects of topical application of capsaicin to human skin: a comparison
of effects evaluated by visual assessment, sensation registration, skin blood flow and cutaneous
impedance measurements. Acta Derm Venereol 1996; 76:129–132.
11. Ollmar S, Nyre´n M, Nicander I, et al. Electrical impedance compared with other non-invasive
bioengineering techniques and visual scoring for detection of irritation in human skin. Br J Dermatol
1994; 130:29–36.
12. Fullerton A, Rode B, Serup J. Skin irritation typing and grading based on laser Doppler perfusion
imaging. Skin Res Technol 2002; 8:23–31.
13. Spoo J, Wigger-Alberti W, Berndt U, et al. Skin cleansers: three test protocols for the assessment of
irritancy ranking. Acta Derm Venereol 2002; 82:13–17.
496
Farage

=== Page 514 ===
14. Wigger-Alberti W, Hinnen U, Elsner P. Predictive testing of metalworking fluids: a comparison of 2
cumulative human irritation models and correlation with epidemiological data. Contact Dermatitis
1997; 36:14–20.
15. Anderson RR. Polarized light examination and photography of the skin. Arch Dermatol 1991;
127:1000–1005.
16. Kollias N. Polarized light photography of human skin. In: Wilhelm KP, Elsner P, Berardesca E,
Maibach HI, eds. Bioengineering of the Skin: Skin Surface Imaging and Analysis. Boca Raton, Florida:
CRC Press, 1997:95–104.
17. Muccini JA, Kollias N, Phillips SB, et al. Polarized light photography in the evaluation of photoaging.
J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 33:765–769.
18. McFall K. Photography of dermatological conditions using polarized light. J Audiov Media Med 1996;
19:5–9.
19. Phillips SB, Kollias N, Gillies R, et al. Polarized light photography enhances visualization of
inflammatory lesions of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol 1997; 37:948–952.
20. Kollias N, Gillies R, Muccini JA, et al. A single parameter, oxygenated hemoglobin, can be used to
quantify experimental irritant-induced inflammation. J Invest Dermatol 1995; 104:421–424.
21. Bruynzeel DP, vanKetel WG, Scheper RJ, et al. Delayed time course of irritation by sodium lauryl
sulfate: observations on threshold reactions. Contact Dermatitis 1982; 8:236–239.
22. Lukacovic MF, Dunlap FE, Michaels SE, et al. Forearm wash test to evaluate the clinical mildness of
cleansing products. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1988; 39:355–366.
23. Lammintausta K, Maibach HI, Wilson D. Susceptibility to cumulative and acute irritant dermatitis.
An experimental approach in human volunteers. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 19:84–90.
24. Basketter D, Reynolds F, Rowson M, et al. Visual assessment of human skin irritation: a sensitive and
reproducible tool. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37:218–220.
25. McFadden JP, Wakelin SH, Basketter DA. Acute irritation thresholds in subjects with type I – type VI
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:147–149.
26. Farage MA. Development of a modified forearm controlled application test method for evaluating the
skin mildness of disposable wipe products. J Cosmet Sci 2000; 51:153–167.
Detecting Skin Irritation Using Enhanced Visual Scoring
497

=== Page 516 ===
47
Sodium Lauryl Sulfate–Induced Irritation
in the Human Face: Regional and
Age-Related Differences
Slaheddine Marrakchi and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Although extensively studied (1), sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) has been rarely used on the
face to investigate mechanisms of irritation (2). Because of the particular skin sensitivity of
the face and the neck and because of the regional variability in the face reactivity to water-
soluble irritant compounds (3) and to compounds inducing contact urticaria (4,5), we conducted
this study with SLS 2% under occlusion for one hour.
Because baseline transepidermal water loss (TEWL) has been speculated as a predictive
parameter to skin susceptibility to SLS (6) and changes in hydration of superficial epidermis
suspected to be responsible for the seasonal variability of skin irritation induced by SLS (7),
we measured the baseline TEWL and capacitance before SLS application and studied their
correlation with changes in TEWL (@TEWL), 1 hour and 23 hours after patch removal (1).
INVESTIGATIONAL STUDY
Two age groups were examined: 10 young subjects, aged 25.2  4.7 years ranging from 19 to
30 years and 10 older subjects aged 73.7  3.9 years ranging from 70 to 81 years. Twelve
volunteers were Caucasians and eight Hispanics.
Eight areas of the skin (forehead, nose, cheek, nasolabial and perioral areas, chin, neck,
and volar forearm) were studied.
After 15 minutes of rest, necessary to suppress excess water evaporation, baseline TEWL
was measured using an evaporimeter, Tewameter1 TM 210* (Courage þ Khazaka, Cologne,
Germany) and baseline capacitance was measured with a Corneometer1 CM 820 PC (Courage þ
Khazaka, Cologne, Germany).
SLS (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, U.S.) 2% (w/v) in water was then applied to each of the
eight areas for one hour under occlusion, using a saturated absorbent filter paper disc (0.8 cm
diameter) in small Finn Chamber aluminum discs (Epitest Ltd. Oy, Finland). On the contralateral
side, water was applied in the same conditions as control.
To assess skin irritation, TEWL was measured 1 hour and 23 hours after patch removal.
TEWL values of the areas tested were corrected according to the changes in the control
areas:
TEWL ¼ TEWL measured  TEWL H2O,
where TEWL measured is that in the tested area at 1hour or 23 hours, and @TEWL H2O ¼ TEWL
control – baseline TEWL H2O, where TEWL control is the measured TEWL value in the control
area at 1 hour or 23 hours.
The skin reactivity to SLS was assessed by the changes in TEWL (@TEWL ¼ TEWL –
baseline TEWL).
To compare the skin reactivity (@TEWL) of the regions within each group, the two-tailed
Student t test for paired data was used. The two-tailed Student t test for unpaired data was
used to compare the two age groups.
Simple linear regression and correlation analysis between basal TEWL and skin irritation
(@TEWL) and between baseline capacitance and @TEWL for each skin location combining the
data of the two age groups were used. @TEWL was considered as the dependent variable.

=== Page 517 ===
COMPARISON OF REACTIVITY BETWEEN AGE GROUPS AND FACE AREA
SLS 2% under occlusion for one hour induced in most of the cases a subclinical irritation and
sometimes minimal erythema. The absolute TEWL values taken after 1 hour and 23 hours did
not show significant differences. Since the 23-hour measurements demonstrated lower
standard deviation values, only the irritation assessed at 23 hours was considered.
Comparison Between the Regions
In the young group, all areas except the forearm reacted to SLS. Skin irritation induced by SLS
and assessed by @TEWL was greater in the cheek and chin when compared with that the neck
and forearm (p < 0.05). The highest @TEWL mean values were found in the cheek and chin
(Table 1), but no statistically significant differences with the remaining regions of the face were
detected. All the other regions except the forehead showed a significantly higher irritation than
the forearm.
In the old group, all regions reacted to SLS except the nose, perioral area, and forearm.
The cheek and chin showed the highest @TEWL mean values (Table 1).
Significantly (p < 0.05) higher reactivity of these two areas was found when compared
with that in the forearm, and when the reactivity in the chin was compared with that in the
forehead.
Comparison Between the Two Age Groups
In all the areas studied, the mean @TEWL values were higher in the young than in the older
group (Table 1). Only in the chin (p ¼ 0.035) and nasolabial area (p ¼ 0.005) were the
differences significant.
CORRELATION STUDY BETWEEN MEASUREMENTS
Correlation Between Baseline TEWL and @ TEWL
Table 2 summarizes the correlations in each area between baseline TEWL and @TEWL 23 hours
after patch removal.
The forehead and the neck showed the strongest correlations (r ¼ 0.6474, p ¼ 0.002 in the
forehead; r ¼ 0.6273, p ¼ 0.003 in the neck).
The nose and chin did not demonstrate a significant correlation between basal TEWL and
TEWL changes induced by SLS. The forearm was not studied since this area did not react to the
surfactant in the same test conditions.
Correlation Between Baseline Capacitance and @ TEWL
The baseline capacitance was not correlated to the skin irritation induced by SLS in any area
studied.
Table 1
Reactivity of Regions in the Young and Old Group
Area
@TEWL (Mean  SD) g/m2 hr
p value
Young group
Old group
Cheek
15.1  12.8
6.8  7.3
0.093
China
13.5  9.9
6.0  3.3
0.035
Forearm
1.9  2.1
1.1  1.5
0.354
Forehead
10.4  13.9
2.3  2.3
0.086
Neck
6.8  6.0
3.6  3.7
0.165
Nasolabial areaa
12.4  6.3
4.4  4.8
0.005
Nose
8.6  7.6
5.0  6.0
0.251
Perioral area
10.7  10.0
4.2  4.1
0.074
Note: @TEWL ¼ TEWL 23 hours after patch test removal corrected to the control – baseline TEWL
aDifference between the young and old group statistically significant (p < 0.05).
500
Marrakchi and Maibach

=== Page 518 ===
CONCLUSIONS
SLS, an anionic surfactant is widely used to study the sensitivity of the skin to irritants. Little
information on the susceptibility of the face to SLS is available (2).
In this study, the influence of age and regional variability on SLS irritation was
investigated with a focus on the skin of the face.
Only TEWL 23 hours after patch removal was taken into consideration because of the
lower standard deviation (SD) when compared with the one-hour values. This difference in SD
might be explained by the “transient damage to the water barrier of the skin” described by
Agner and Serup (8) and induced by exposure to water. This transient increase of TEWL not
related to SLS or to the evaporation of additional water lasts between 1 and 3 hours after patch
removal.
Considering the increase of TEWL after SLS exposure (@TEWL), the young group had a
higher irritant response than the old group in the chin and nasolabial area. In the remaining
regions including the neck, @TEWL mean values were higher in the young group, although the
differences were not significant. This lack of significant differences might be explained by the
high SD values (Table 1) in these regions. Previous studies (2,9) investigated the influence of
age on the susceptibility to SLS and reported a decrease in sensitivity in the elderly, which is in
concordance with our results.
Various protocols (concentrations, application time) use SLS in water solution to induce
skin irritation (10,11). In our study, since the face was suspected to be more sensitive than the
remaining regions of the body, and for a practical purpose, SLS 2% was applied only for one
hour under occlusion. This protocol was sufficient to induce subclinical irritation in most of the
areas of the face but not in the forearm, confirming that the face is more sensitive than the
forearm.
Although the cheek and chin showed the highest @TEWL mean values, no regional
variations were detected between the various regions of the face in both age groups, but the
cheek and chin were more sensitive than the neck in the young group. This lack of significant
differences between regions might be explained by the high SD observed in @TEWL values.
To see whether significant differences in skin irritation induced by surfactant exist
between the regions of the face, higher SLS concentrations as well as repeated open
applications should be tested.
Skin sensitivity to water-soluble irritants has also been explored by the stinging test (3,12).
Marked regional variation in the intensity of stinging was found (3): nasolabial fold > cheek >
chin > retroauricular area > forehead. However, stinging test expresses the percutaneous
penetration of the irritant compound and the sensory nerve response that depends upon nerve
density in the skin. Marked regional variability of the nerve density has been reported (13).
Skin irritation expressed by @TEWL is the result of percutaneous penetration of the
compound and the changes made to the skin barrier. This could explain that both methods
(stinging test and SLS-induced irritation) might not show the same sensitivity regional
Table 2
Correlations in Each Area Between Baseline TEWL (BTEWL) and Reactivity of the Skin to SLS, 23
hours after Patch Removal (@TEWL)
BTEWL (mean  SD)
TEWL 23 hr (mean  SD)
@TEWL (mean  SD)
r
p
Cheeka
15.63  6.70
26.63  15.30
10.96  11.01
0.4616
0.040
China
20.87  6.37
30.47  12.08
9.77  8.13
0.3535
0.126
Forearm
8.64  3.97
9.70  4.92
1.51  1.83
–
–
Foreheada
14.10  5.71
20.40  14.96
6.39  10.53
0.6474
0.002
Necka
11.55  4.35
16.63  8.54
5.18  5.12
0.6273
0.003
Nasolabiala
28.74  8.56
36.93  13.44
8.40  6.78
0.4831
0.031
Nosea
19.04  6.03
25.27  11.15
6.77  6.92
0.3218
0.166
Perioral
24.25  8.93
29.98  14.6
7.47  8.17
0.4547
0.044
Note: r coefficient of correlation
p significance (significant correlation when p < 0.05)
aAreas that reacted to SLS: statistically significant (p < 0.05) difference baseline TEWL and TEWL 23 hours after
patch removal.
Sodium Lauryl Sulfate–Induced Irritation
501

=== Page 519 ===
variation in the human face, although the cheek and the chin were among the most sensitive
areas demonstrated by both methods.
The correlation study showed a significant correlation between basal TEWL and @TEWL
in five of the seven areas that have reacted to SLS (Table 2).
The correlations between baseline TEWL and TEWL 23 hours after patch removal were
more obvious. All the areas that reacted to SLS (all the areas studied except the forearm)
showed a strong correlation coefficient varying between 0.76 and 0.88, with a highly significant
p value <0.001.
However, we think that the correlation between basal TEWL and the absolute TEWL
values after irritation does not imply that higher basal TEWL values predispose to higher skin
sensitivity, but only the correlation between baseline TEWL and the changes in TEWL after
irritation (@TEWL) may have this significance. Even if for different basal TEWL values, the
changes in TEWL are the same, a positive correlation could be found because TEWL is
considered as a stable parameter (14).
Conflicting results have been published with regard to this aspect. Some authors
correlated the absolute TEWL values before and after irritation (6,15–17). Others (18) used
basal TEWL and @TEWL. Agner (18), studying healthy and atopic subjects, reported a
positive correlation between baseline TEWL and the increase in TEWL induced by SLS only
in the healthy group. Although in the atopic group, basal TEWL was significantly higher than
the normal subjects, the changes after SLS exposure were not significantly different between the
two groups.
These findings are in concordance with our study, where some areas of the face (nasolabial
area) showed higher basal TEWL values than others (the cheek) but failed to demonstrate higher
sensitivity (Table 2). So, each region of the face has probably its own characteristics influencing
the skin sensitivity to irritants, probably independent, from basal TEWL.
REFERENCES
1. Agner T. Noninvasive measuring methods for the investigation of irritant patch test reactions: a study
of patients with hand eczema, atopic dermatitis, and controls. Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 1992;
Suppl 173:1–26.
2. Cua AB, Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Cutaneous sodium lauryl sulphate irritation potential: age and
regional variability. Br J Dermatol 1990; 123:607–613.
3. Frosch PJ, Kligman AM. A method for appraising the stinging capacity of topically applied substances.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:197–209.
4. Shriner DL, Maibach HI. Regional variation of nonimmunologic contact urticaria: functional map of
the human face. Skin Pharmacol 1996; 9(5):312–321.
5. Marrakchi S, Maibach HI. Functional map and age-related differences in the human face:
nonimmunologic contact urticaria induced by hexyl nicotinate. Contact Dermatitis 2006; 55(1):15–19.
6. Tupker RA, Coenraads P-R, Pinnagoda J, et al. Baseline transepidermal water loss (TEWL) as a
prediction of susceptibility to sodium lauryl sulfate. Contact Dermatitis 1989; 20:265–269.
7. Agner T, Serup J. Seasonal variation of skin resistance to irritants. Br J Dermatol 1989; 121:323–328.
8. Agner T, Serup J. Time course of occlusive effects on skin evaluated by measurement of transepidermal
water loss (TEWL): including patch tests with sodium lauryl sulphate and water. Contact Dermatitis
1993; 28:6–9.
9. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Irritant effect of a model surfactant on the human vulva and
forearm. J. Reprod Med 1990; 35:1035–1039.
10. Wilhelm KP, Surber C, Maibach HI. Quantification of sodium lauryl sulfate irritant dermatitis in man,
comparison of four techniques: skin color reflectance, transepidermal water loss, laser Doppler flow
measurement and visual scores. Arch Dermatol Res 1989; 281:293–295.
11. Van Neste D, De Brouwer B. Monitoring of skin response to sodium lauryl sulphate: clinical scores
versus bioengineering methods. Contact Dermatitis 1992; 27:151–156.
12. Seidenari S, Francomano M, Mantovani L. Baseline biophysical parameters in subjects with sensitive
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:311–315.
13. Besne´ I, Descombes C, Breton L. Effect of age and anatomical site on density of sensory innervation in
human epidermis. Arch Dermatol 2002; 138:1445–1450.
14. Oestmann E, Lavrijsen APM, Hermans J, et al. Skin barrier function as assessed by transepidermal
water loss and vascular response to hexyl nicotinate: intra- and inter-individual variability. Br J
Dermatol 1993; 128:130–136.
502
Marrakchi and Maibach

=== Page 520 ===
15. Murahata RI, Crowe DM, Roheim JR. The use of transepidermal water loss to measure and predict the
irritation response to surfactants. Int J Cosmet Sci 1986; 8:225–231.
16. Freeman S, Maibach HI. Study of irritant contact dermatitis produced by repeat patch testing with
sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS) and assessed by visual methods, transepidermal water loss and laser
Doppler velocimetry. J Am Acad Dermatol 1988; 19:496–502.
17. Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. Susceptibility to irritant dermatitis induced by sodium lauryl sulfate. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1990; 23:122–124.
18. Agner T. Susceptibility of atopic dermatitis patients to irritant dermatitis caused by sodium lauryl
sulphate. Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 1990; 70:296–300.
Sodium Lauryl Sulfate–Induced Irritation
503

=== Page 522 ===
48
Irritation Differences Between Genital and
Upper Arm Skin and the Effects of Emollient
Applicationa
Miranda A. Farage
Feminine Clinical Sciences Innovation Center, The Procter & Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
The vulva comprises variable, specialized tissues that differ in structure, morphology, and
embryonic derivation. The cutaneous epithelium of vulvar structures, including the labia
major and labia minora, is keratinized. The epidermis of the labia majora contains sweat
glands, sebaceous glands, and hair follicles; these structures are absent in the labia minora.
The labia majora has greater cutaneous thickness and keratinization than the labia
minora.
The vulvar structures are highly vascularized, with the labia majora exhibiting more than
twice the blood flow as in forearm skin (1).
Menses and venous blood differ in many factors of their composition. Approximately
50% of menstrual fluid is blood; the remainder of the menses fluid is made up of desquamated
endometrial tissue and vaginal epithelial cells, cervicovaginal secretions, and endogenous
vaginal microbes. The hemoglobin and iron content of menses varies throughout the menstrual
cycle and is generally higher than in venous blood, whereas white blood cell and platelet
counts are lower in menses than in venous blood (2).
The tissues of the labia majora and minora are more permeable than tissues at other
anatomical sites, such as the forearm. To assess whether menses exposure contributes to
vulvar irritation, we performed a four-day skin patch test of menses and venous blood on the
labia majora and on the upper arm. To our knowledge, the potential contribution of menses
to vulvar irritation has not been examined previously by skin patch test methods. In the
study presented here, menses and venous blood have been compared to determine whether
components unique to menses fluid (e.g., the matrix metalloproteinases, enzymes that
catalyze endometrial breakdown) (3,4), might contribute to skin irritation. Although patch
testing is performed routinely on the back or the arm, we chose to assess both the arm and
the vulva because anatomical differences in irritant susceptibility can affect the erythema
response (5,6).
The study that has been conducted was approved by an Institutional Review Board. All
20 women volunteers provided written informed consent. Physiologic saline (nonirritant
control), aqueous sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS, 0.6% w/v, irritant control), and each volunteer’s
own venous blood and menses collected overnight with an intravaginal cup (Instead Softcup1,
Ultrafem Inc., Missoula, Montana, U.S.) (0.3 mL each) were applied for two consecutive 24-hour
periods to the lateral labia majora (randomized across 2 clipped sites on each labium) and to
the upper arm (randomized across 5 sites per arm, see below). Occlusive patches (Webril1
cotton pad, Professional Medical Products Company, Kendall LTP, Chicopee, Massachusetts,
U.S.) secured with Blenderm1 occlusive tape (3 M Health Care, St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S.) were
applied to the labia and to one upper arm; semi-occlusive patches (Finn Chamber1, Epitest,
Hyria, Finland) secured with Tegaderm1 tape (3 M Health Care, St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S.)
were applied to the alternate arm. The fifth site on each arm was pretreated with a proprietary,
petrolatum-based emollient prior to menses application. A standard five-point erythema scale
was used to score skin irritation (7,8).
This study showed that the labia majora were less responsive than the upper arm to all
applied materials (Fig. 1A and B). Notably, menses and venous blood elicited no significant
aSome parts adapted from Farage M, Warren R, Wang-Weigand S. The vulva is relatively insensitive to menses-
induced irritation. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 2005; 24(4):243–246. With kind permission from Taylor and Francis Group.

=== Page 523 ===
erythema on the labia majora at either time point; SLS, the irritant control, elicited significant,
mild erythema (0.6  0.08 and 1.2  0.15 at 24 and 48 hours, respectively). The limited response
to menses and venous blood on the labia could not have been predicted a priori. Indeed, some
polar substances (e.g., benzalkonium chloride, maleic anhydride) elicit heightened irritant
reactions on the labia relative to the arm (5).
On the upper arm, menses and venous blood elicited mild erythema at the 48-hour time
point only (Fig. 1B: 0.7  0.14 and 1.1  0.14, respectively). No discernible difference in skin
irritation to these fluids was observed at this site, despite differences in composition between
menses and venous blood. Sodium lauryl sulfate elicited moderate to severe erythema on the
arm at both the 24- and 48-hour time points (Fig. 1A and B: 2.3  0.09 and 3.4  0.14,
respectively). Mean scores to SLS application on the arm were three- to fourfold higher than
Figure 1
Skin erythema of the labia majora and upper arm following test materials application under occlusive
patch for 24 and 48 hours, respectively. Abbreviations: Test materials: Saline, nonirritant control; MF, menses
fluid; VB, venous blood; SLS, 0.6% aqueous sodium lauryl sulfate (irritant control). (A) 24-hour exposure. *:
Significantly different (p  0.05) from other test materials applied to that anatomical site. (B) 48-hour exposure. #:
Significantly different (p  0.05) from the nonirritant control (saline) applied to that anatomical site. *: Significantly
different (p  0.05) from other test materials applied to that anatomical site.
506
Farage

=== Page 524 ===
those observed on the labia; this is consistent with prior reports that the arm is more
susceptible to SLS-induced skin irritation than the labia (6,9).
Semi-occlusive conditions attenuated the erythematous response to all materials (Fig. 2,
upper arm, 48 hours). Notably, SLS-induced erythema was reduced almost sixfold (mean
scores of 0.6  0.1 vs. 3.4  0.14, semi- and full-occlusion, respectively). Pretreatment of the
upper arm with emollient prevented menses-induced skin irritation, regardless of the degree
of occlusion (10).
CONCLUSIONS
To our knowledge, the potential contribution of menses to vulvar irritation has not been
examined previously by skin patch test methods. Our preliminary observations suggest that
the vulva (labia majora) is adapted to be less sensitive to menses-induced skin irritation. This
adaptation is not universal, as other irritants have elicited heightened responses on the vulva
(5).
We also found that pretreatment with a petrolatum-based emollient attenuates potential
skin irritation from menses. If the latter observation can be extended to other biological fluids,
it may be clinically relevant to limiting skin irritation under wound dressings, sanitary pads,
and incontinence garments.
One caveat to interpreting visually scored skin erythema at these anatomical sites:
heightened vulvar pigmentation as compared with the arm may mask inflammation, and
utilizing bioengineering technology may clarify this issue. Future studies should also examine
whether the menstrual cycle has an impact on the irritant response. Skin barrier function and
reactivity to irritants at other sites exhibit cyclical variability (11,12), but an effect of the
menstrual cycle on vulvar skin reactions has not been documented.
REFERENCES
1. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Multiple parameter assessment of vulvar irritant contact dermatitis.
Contact Dermat 1990; 23(1):20–26.
Figure 2
Skin erythema of the upper arm induced by test materials applied for 48 cumulative hours under semi-
occlusive or occlusive patch. Abbreviations: Test materials: Saline, nonirritant control; MF, menses fluid; MF þ
emollient, menses fluid applied to emollient treated skin; VB, venous blood; SLS, 0.6% aqueous sodium lauryl
sulfate (irritant control). {: Significantly different (p  0.05) from the nonirritant control (saline) under semi-occlusive
conditions. #: Significantly different (p  0.05) from the nonirritant control (saline) under occlusive conditions. *:
Significantly different (p  0.05) from other test materials under occlusive conditions.
Irritation Differences and Effects of Emollient Application
507

=== Page 525 ===
2. Farage MA, Maibach HI. Tissue structure and physiology of the vulva. In: Farage MA, Maibach HI,
eds. The Vulva: Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology. New York and London: Informa Health Care,
2006:9–26.
3. Beller FK, Schweppe KW, eds. Review of the Biology of Menstrual Blood. New York: Elsevier/North
Holland, 1979:231–235.
4. Marbaix E, Kokorine I, Moulin P, et al. Menstrual breakdown of human endometrium can be
mimicked in vitro and is selectively and reversibly blocked by inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 1996; 93(17):9120–9125.
5. Britz MB, Maibach HI. Human cutaneous vulvar reactivity to irritants. Contact Dermat 1979; 5(6):
375–377.
6. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Effect of low-concentration sodium lauryl sulfate on human vulvar
and forearm skin: age-related differences. J Reprod Med 1991; 36(1):77–81.
7. Patrick E, Maibach HI. Dermatotoxicology. In: Hayes AW, ed. Principles and Methods of Toxicology,
2nd ed. New York: Raven Press, 1989, (Chapter 32).
8. Phillips L 2nd, Steinberg M, Maibach HI, et al. A comparison of rabbit and human skin response to
certain irritants. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1972; 21(3):369–382.
9. Elsner P, Wilhelm D, Maibach HI. Irritant effect of a model surfactant on the human vulva and
forearm: age-related differences. J Reprod Med 1990; 35(11):1035–1039.
10. Farage MA, Maibach HI. The menstrual cycle, the composition of menses and the effect of menses on
the skin. In: Farage MA, Maibach HI, eds. The Vulva: Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology. New
York and London: Informa Health Care, 2006:151–165.
11. Agner T, Damm P, Skouby SO. Menstrual cycle and skin reactivity. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991;
24(4):566–570.
12. Harvell J, Hussona-Saeed I, Maibach HI. Changes in transepidermal water loss and cutaneous blood
flow during the menstrual cycle. Contact Dermat 1992; 27(5):294–301.
508
Farage

=== Page 526 ===
49
Ethnicity as a Possible Endogenous Factor
in Irritant Contact Dermatitis: Comparing
the Irritant Response Among Caucasians,
Blacks, and Asians
Bobeck S. Modjtahedi, Sara P. Modjtahedi, and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) is a common and potentially serious dermatological disorder
(1–3). It is also the second most common occupational illness (4). Since contact dermatitis can
develop into chronic skin disease, understanding the underlying factors of its etiology is
clinically important.
This condition is divided into several forms, depending on the nature of exposure and
the resulting clinical presentation. Two common entities are acute and cumulative dermatitis.
Acute contact dermatitis presents the classic symptoms of irritation such as localized and
superficial erythema, edema, and chemosis. It occurs as a result of single exposure to an acute
irritant (5). Cumulative irritant dermatitis presents similar symptoms but occurs when
exposure to a less potent irritant is repeated until signs and symptoms develop over weeks,
years, or decades.
The ability of the offending irritant to cause dermatitis depends on both the nature of the
irritant agent and the initial skin condition. The severity of symptoms depends on exogenous
and endogenous factors (6–8). Exogenous factors include the irritant’s chemical and physical
properties and the vehicle and frequency of application. Endogenous factors have been
speculated to be age, sex, preexisting skin diseases, skin sensitivity, genetic background, and—
the subject of this review—race (6), or, in today’s parlance, ethnicity.
Ethnic differences in skin physiology and pathophysiology exist (9–11), and so whether
ethnicity, is in fact, an endogenous factor affecting ICD is an important question in
dermatotoxicology. Ethnic predisposition to ICD has been studied by comparing the irritant
responses of blacks and Asians to those of Caucasians as a benchmark. We review these
studies to evaluate if ethnic differences in susceptibility to ICD do exist.
The answer to the question of ethnicity as a factor in ICD has clinical and practical
research consequences. Premarket testing of topical products (soaps, detergents, perfumes,
and cosmetics), risk assessment for occupational hazards, and subject-inclusion requirements
for product safety studies require knowledge about ethnic differences in irritation (12).
BLACK VS. CAUCASIAN IRRITATION RESPONSE
Using erythema as the parameter to quantify irritation, early studies note that blacks display less
redness than Caucasians. In a hallmark paper, Marshall et al. (13) showed that while 59% of
Caucasians exhibit acute irritant dermatitis as defined by erythema from 1% dichlorethylsul-
phide (DCES), only 15% of blacks do. Later, Weigand and Mershon (14) performed a 24-hour
patch test using orthochlorobenzylidene malononitrile as an irritant, which confirmed that
blacks are less susceptible than Caucasians to ICD as defined by erythema (Table 1, item A).
Further studies, also using erythema as a measure of irritation, showed that blacks are less
reactive than Caucasians to irritants (160 and 1280 mM/L methacoline) (19,20).
Weigand and Gaylor (21) showed that if the stratum corneum (SC) of black and
Caucasian subjects is removed, there is no significant difference in irritation as measured by
erythema between the two groups. They concluded that there might be structural differences

=== Page 527 ===
in the SC that provide more protection from chemical irritation to black skin than Caucasian
skin. Indeed, while the SC thickness is the same in both races (22), the SC of black skin has
more cellular layers and stronger cells (12), more casual lipids (23), increased desquamation
(24), decreased ceramides (25), and higher electrical resistance (26) than Caucasian skin.
Wesley and Maibach also found significant evidence that innate differences exist in skin
properties between black and Caucasian skin (3). They found that blacks had higher TEWL
(transepidermal water loss) values, decreased skin surface pH, variable blood vessel reactivity,
and large mast cell granules. These variables, they concluded, may play a role in the
differences observed in dermatologic skin disorders between blacks and Caucasians.
It is difficult, however, to conclude that blacks are less susceptible to cutaneous irritation
only on the basis of studies using visual scoring. Erythema is notoriously difficult to measure
in darker skin. Perhaps the difference in skin irritation between the two test groups is simply a
result of the difficulty of assessing erythema in black subjects.
To better understand this issue, it is necessary to analyze studies that use alternative
accurate detection methods (27) to assess the level of induced cutaneous irritation. Berardesca
and Maibach (17) performed such a study to determine the difference in irritation between
young Caucasian and young black skin. They applied 0.5% and 2.0% sodium lauryl sulfate
(SLS) to untreated, pre-occluded, and pre-delipidized skin. Then they quantified the resulting
level of irritation using objective techniques: laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV), TEWL, and
water content (WC) of the SC. They found no statistical difference in irritation between the two
groups as measured by LDV and WC, but they did find a statistical difference in the TEWL
results of the pre-occluded test with 0.5% SLS. In that test, blacks had higher TEWL levels than
Caucasians, suggesting that in the pre-occluded state, blacks are more susceptible to irritation
than Caucasians. The finding of this study contradicts the hypothesis that blacks are less
reactive than Caucasians. Further, Wesley and Maibach observed that six out of eight studies
demonstrated higher TEWL values in black skin (Table 1, item B) (18).
Gean et al. (18) found no statistically significant difference in the maximum LDV
response between black and Caucasian subject groups when they challenged skin with topical
methyl nicotinate (0.1, 0.3, and 1.0 M). Further, unlike the earlier studies, they found no
difference in the blood flow and erythema responses between the two groups.
Guy et al. (15) supports the results finding that LDV measurements of induced blood
flow after application of 100-mM methyl nicotinate reveal no significant differences between
black and Caucasian subject groups; however, a significant difference was found using
photoplethysmography (PPG). Caucasians had a greater PPG value than blacks did,
suggesting that Caucasians may be more susceptible to irritation. The authors did not explain
why blood flow measurements using PPG showed a statistically significant difference between
the groups when LDV did not.
Berardesca and Maibach (16) also found decreased reactivity in blood vessels in the black
test group than in the Caucasian test group. They measured the post-occlusive cutaneous
Table 1
Black Vs. Caucasian Irritation Response
Interference
Endpoint
Comment
Reference
A. Findings that show a statistically significant difference in the irritation response between blacks and Caucasians:
1% Dichlorethylsulfide
Erythema
Untreated
Marshall et al. (13)
Orthochorobenzylidene
Erythema
Untreated
Weigand et al. (14)
100-mM methyl nicotinate
PPG
Untreated
Guy et al. (15)
0.05% Clobetasol
LDV
Pre-occluded
Berardesca and Maibach (16)
0.5–2.0% SLS
TEWL
Pre-occluded
Berardesca and Maibach (17)
B. Findings that do not show a statistically significant difference in the irritation response between blacks and Caucasians:
0.5–2.0% SLS
LDV and WC
Untreated, pre-occluded,
and pre-delipidized
Berardesca and Maibach (17)
100-mM methyl nicotinate
LDV
Untreated
Guy et al. (15)
0.1-, 0.3-, and 1.0-M
methyl nicotninate
LDV and Erythema
Untreated
Gean et al. (18)
Abbreviations: PPG, photoplethysmography; LDV, laser Doppler velocimetry; TEWL, transepidermal water loss;
WC, water content.
510
Modjtahedi et al.

=== Page 528 ===
reactive hyperaemia—temporary increase in blood flow after vascular occlusion—after an
application of a potent corticoid, and measured vasoconstriction using LDV; the black subject
group had several significantly different parameters of the hyperaemic reaction. They found a
decreased area under the LDV curve response, a decreased LDV peak response, and a
decreased decay slope after peak blood flow, showing that blacks have a decreased level of
irritation-induced reactivity of blood vessels. These results are consistent with their previous
work.
In conclusion, older studies using erythema as the only indicator for irritation show that
Blacks have less irritable skin than Caucasians, but more recent studies using objective
bioengineering techniques suggest that the eye may have misled us to an incorrect
interpretation.
ASIAN VS. CAUCASIAN IRRITATION RESPONSE
An early study comparing Caucasian and Japanese susceptibility to cutaneous irritation was
conducted by Rapaport (28). He performed a standard 21-day patch test protocol on Caucasian
and Japanese females in the Los Angeles area, in which 15 irritants (different types or
concentrations of cleansers, sunscreen, and SLS) were tested. The results were reported
according to the cumulative readings of all subjects in an ethnicity group for each irritant.
Japanese women had higher cumulative irritation scores for 13 of the 15 irritants tested;
Rapaport interpreted these findings to confirm the common impression that Japanese are more
sensitive to irritants than Caucasians are. Also, this sensitivity was independent on the
concentration or exact chemical formulation of the substance tested, suggesting that Japanese
are in general more sensitive than Caucasians.
While these findings are important, it is difficult to interpret the data. First, as also noted
by Robinson (12), Rapaport provides little experimental detail and data. For example, while the
study required 21 separate days of irritation readings, only the end cumulative irritation scores
are reported. Had he reported daily irritation readings, we would have been able to note the
time pattern of response. Further, no statistical tests were conducted to ascertain if the
differences between the Japanese and Caucasian subjects were statistically significant. Note,
too, that the cumulative irritation test score does not distinguish between the intensity of a
subject’s response and the number of subjects responding. Thus it is possible, e.g., for a few
extremely sensitive Japanese subjects to inflate the overall irritation score. Therefore, at the
minimum, it would be helpful to provide standard deviations to rule out such problems.
What at first seems surprising, Basketter et al. (29) found that Germans are more sensitive
than Chinese subjects. Subjects in Germany, China, and the United Kingdom were exposed to
varying concentrations (0.1–20%) of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) for four hours on the upper
outer arm, and the resulting dose-response irritation was measured on the basis of erythema.
They concluded that the German subjects tend to be more sensitive than the Chinese, and the
Chinese to be slightly more sensitive than the British. This conclusion is the opposite of
popular belief and of the Rapaport study, which indicated that Asians are more likely to
develop ICD than are Caucasians.
There are, however, inherent flaws in this study, some of which the authors
acknowledged. First and foremost, this study does not control the variables of time and
location. The German and Chinese studies were performed in three to six weeks in the winter,
while the U.K. study was spread over 15 months. Also, in particular, German winters are
colder and drier than Chinese winters, which in turn tend to be colder than English winters.
These variables will distort the results in a predictable way if we assume that an individual
becomes more sensitive to ICD in colder and drier climates (2). We would then expect, on the
basis of climatic conditions, that the German subjects would be more reactive than the Chinese,
and the Chinese more reactive than the British. As these are the actual results, we cannot
necessarily contribute the differences in irritant response to ethnicity, as it is reasonably likely
that the differences are possibly due to weather conditions. Also, they mention that 15% of the
U.K. volunteers were black. While they account for this by showing that the black irritant
response was similar to the overall U.K. group response, it is scientifically problematic to mix
racial groups in a study testing for racial differences. Furthermore, they supplied no statistical
tests for their conclusion that Germans are slightly more sensitive than the other ethnic groups.
Ethnicity as a Possible Endogenous Factor in ICD
511

=== Page 529 ===
To shed more light on the results, we conducted simple binomial tests of the differences in the
percentage response of the subject groups. Using the resulting statistics, we found a larger
statistically significant difference between the two predominately Caucasian groups than
between each of the Caucasian and the Chinese groups (Table 2). These results indicate that
race may not be the predominant factor affecting susceptibility to ICD in this study; other
uncontrolled variables may dominate the results.
Variables such as time and location were eliminated by the Goh and Chia (30) study that
tested the susceptibility to acute irritant dermatitis in Chinese, Malay, and Indian subjects.
These subjects were exposed to 2% SLS in the right scapular region, and resulting irritation
was measured using TEWL. This technique is an objective way to indirectly quantify
irritation—the higher the TEWL value, the greater the implicit irritation. There was no
significant difference in the TEWL level of irritant skin in a three-way statistical test of the
three racial groups. There was a significant difference, however, between the TEWL values of
Chinese and Malay subjects so that Chinese subjects were more susceptible to contact
dermatitis. While this test does not contribute to the discussion of the difference in
predisposition of irritation in Caucasian skin versus Asian skin, it does add to the overall
question of whether race can be a predisposition to irritant dermatitis.
Foy et al. (31) clearly added to our knowledge of the difference in the acute and
cumulative irritation response in Japanese and Caucasian female skin. They reduced some
variables that compromised other studies; location, time, season, and scores were the same for
both study populations. Eleven different materials were tested in the acute test; they were
applied to the upper arms for 24 hours, and irritation was measured on the basis of erythema.
The cumulative test consisted of testing five irritants using a four-exposure cumulative patch
protocol.
In the acute test, while there is a slight tendency toward greater susceptibility to irritation
among Japanese subjects, only 4 out of the 11 irritants caused a significant difference in
reactivity between the two groups—these were the most concentrated irritants used. This
shows that perhaps for more concentrated irritants, there is indeed a statistical difference in the
acute contact dermatitis response; of course, this study needs to be interpreted in context with
others to follow. For the cumulative study, the skin irritation scores between the two test
groups are close, but the Japanese tended to have slightly higher numbers. The differences,
however, only reached statistical significance in two instances. And as the authors noted, it is
Table 2
Statistical Analysis of the Basketter et al. (29) study
0.1%
SDS
0.25%
SDS
0.5%
SDS
1.0%
SDS
2.5%
SDS
5.0%
SDS
10%
SDS
20%
SDS
Germany
0.03
0.09
0.23
0.50
0.65
0.72
0.76
ND
China
0
0
0.01
0.21
0.45
0.61
0.79
0.90
U.K.
0.01
0.01
0.06
0.15
0.33
0.41
0.49
0.76
N
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Z (Germany-China)
1.75
3.07*
4.79*
4.29*
2.84*
1.65
0.51
NA
Z (U.K.-China)
1.00
1.00
1.92
1.10
1.74
2.83*
4.42*
2.64*
Z (U.K.-Germany)
1.01
2.60*
3.41*
5.28*
4.53*
4.42*
3.94*
NA
The numbers in the first 3 rows are the decimal value of the percentage of the group that developed a positive
irritant reaction at a specific SDS concentration. The numbers in the last 3 rows are the Z-values. We applied the
binomial test to ascertain the differences in the percentage response of the subject groups:
Z ¼
r1  r2
½2rð1  rÞ=10050
where r1 and r2 are the ratios for the 2 ethnic groups and r is the weighted average. Since the sample sizes for
different groups are equal, r becomes the simple average. An asterisk indicates that the ratios are significant at the
5% level.
Note that all the U.K.-Germany differences, except 1, are statistically significant; however, more than half of the
U.K.-China and almost half of Germany-China differences are not statistically significant. This indicates a larger
statistically significant difference between the 2 Caucasian groups than that between the Caucasian and Asian
groups.
Abbreviations: SDS, sodium dodecyl sulfate; Z, Z-values.
512
Modjtahedi et al.

=== Page 530 ===
difficult to interpret the importance of those two instances since the statistical significant
differences are not maintained at later points in the timeline. It is safe to conclude, therefore,
that while the acute irritant response to highly concentrated irritants was significantly different
between the Japanese and Caucasian subjects, the cumulative irritant response rarely reaches a
statistical difference.
Studies that include both acute and cumulative irritant tests, like the one above, are more
informative than single tests since they give a more complete view of differences in skin
irritation between groups. Robinson (32) conducted a series of studies that tested racial
differences in acute and cumulative skin irritation responses between Caucasian and Asian
populations. In the first acute tests, Caucasian and Japanese groups were exposed on the upper
outer arm to five irritants under occlusion for up to four hours. The resulting erythema was
scored on an arbitrary visual scale. The results are represented as the cumulative percentage
incidence of positive test reactions to the different irritants.
It is curious to note that while Japanese subjects tend to be more susceptible to acute
irritation than Caucasians, neither one irritant nor one test time caused a significant
response difference between the two groups. Further, note that for three of the five
irritants only Caucasians reacted at early test times, contradicting the hypothesis that
Japanese are more reactive to irritants. But even this trend-breaking difference is not
considered statistically significant. The acute irritation response data were then
reanalyzed in terms of possible differences in temporal response. The analysis showed
that Japanese subjects generally react faster than their Caucasian counterparts, as
indicated by their shorter TR50 values (the time it takes for the cumulative irritation
score to reach 50%). While this result is interesting and adds the new dimension of
temporal differences in reactivity between the two groups, hard data were not provided
and statistical analysis was not conducted to see if this temporal pattern difference is
indeed statistically significant.
The cumulative irritation test was conducted concurrently and on the same Japanese and
Caucasian subjects. Four concentrations of SDS (0.025%, 0.05%, 0.1%, and 0.3%) were applied
on the subjects’ upper backs for 24 hours for 14 days. The resulting skin grades were summed
for all subjects for all test days. For the two lower SDS concentrations the Japanese subjects
reacted only slightly more than the Caucasian subjects, but only the difference in skin grades
for 0.025% SDS reached statistical significance. When this data were analyzed in terms of
temporal response, for the two lowest concentrations, the Japanese reacted only slightly faster
than their Caucasian counterparts. Whether the difference in reaction time is statistically
significant is not known.
In the same study, Robinson then applied both the acute and cumulative irritation
protocols to compare three new subject groups—Chinese, Japanese, and Caucasian—with each
other. The cumulative irritation study found no statistically significant differences between the
different groups. In the acute test, he found that, in most cases, the Chinese subjects were more
reactive to irritants than Caucasians, but that this difference significant in only one case, and
he stated that most likely this was an anomaly. There was no discernable difference between
the Japanese and Chinese groups. And surprisingly, when the Japanese subjects were again
compared with the Caucasian subjects, as they were in the beginning of his study, the results
showed no significant difference between the two groups.
While Robinson’s first two-way irritation response comparison test between Japanese
and Caucasian subjects did show some statistical differences, the fact that they could not be
confirmed in the second half of the study emphasizes the difficulty in obtaining repeatable
results in this type of study. For one, in the statistical sense, Robinson’s sample sizes
(approximately 20 people) were small, combined with the variability between human skin
within an ethnic group; this makes it difficult to make concrete conclusions. His study showed,
however, that there were essentially no significant differences between the Asian and
Caucasian groups, at least none that could be repeated.
Robinson et al. (33) had similar results. Using the four-hour occlusion patch method, they
compared the relative acute skin reactivity of Asian and Caucasian subjects using the irritation
temporal response to measure the difference in reactivity between the test groups. They tested
five chemicals, including 20% SDS and 100% decanol. Unlike the previously described study,
they failed to find a statistical difference between the reactivity to multiple irritants between
the two groups even at the four-hour mark. Then they did something new: They separated the
Ethnicity as a Possible Endogenous Factor in ICD
513

=== Page 531 ===
racial subpopulations into “sensitive” and “normal” groups to test any differences in percentage
cumulative scores and temporal responses within these new groups but across race (i.e., he
compared sensitive Asians with sensitive Caucasians). There were no statistically significant
differences between subjects of the same skin type in different racial groups. This further
contraindicates the hypothesis that Asians are more reactive to irritants than Caucasians.
Recently Robinson (34) compiled five years of his previous data and compared the acute
reactivity differences between Caucasian and Asian (combined Japanese and Chinese)
subgroups using the four-hour human patch method. The data were represented in terms of
the time it took for subjects to have a positive response to the irritant chemical. Again, as in
most experiments, Asians displayed a greater irritation response score than Caucasians.
However, this difference only reached statistical difference at the four-hour mark, with SDS
and decanol as the irritants. Note that while these results of this study are probably more
representative of the population at large because of the relatively large sample size (200 plus),
the data from this study were compiled from three different testing centers over five years.
This could have potentially added uncontrolled and unaccounted-for variables.
In support of the long-held belief that Asians are more susceptible to ICD, several studies
do indeed demonstrate this tendency (31,33,34). Rarely, however, is this trend statistically
significant, and even more rarely can the statistical significance be repeated in another study.
Therefore, it can be concluded from these studies that there is no fundamental difference
between Asian and Caucasian cutaneous irritant reactivity—the overall irritant response and
the time to reach that response is similar in both subgroups.
But the lack of comparable studies, small sample sizes, external variability, and
intravariability within the subgroups make it difficult to completely dismiss Rapaport’s
original findings that Asians are more reactive than Caucasians. For example, different studies
apply the irritant test material on different parts of the body, which might have different
reaction responses. This makes it difficult to compare the results of one study with another and
therefore raises the question of whether a more solid trend among studies would exist if the
irritants were applied to the same anatomical site. Further, with regard to skin properties,
Wesley and Maibach found that the data remain largely discordant and poorly characterized
when discussing Asian skin (3). For the time being, however, in terms of topical product safety,
risk assessment for occupational hazards, and global product marketing it would be practical
to assume that few statistical differences between Asian and Caucasian cutaneous reactivity
exist.
CONCLUSION
In Table 3 are summarized some potent factors that might influence the refinement of
interpretation in future investigations. These studies demonstrate that there is little evidence of
statistically significant differences in the irritant response between Caucasian and black or
Asian groups. We can see no consensus on whether race is indeed an endogenous factor in
ICD. Intuitively, we suspect that ethnic differences exist in skin function and may have
evolved as have those in hair and other differences. Basically, the studies suggesting
differences in skin (15,17) are “stress” in nature (pre-occluded). Presumably new insights into
physiology, pharmacology, and toxicology may clarify this situation.
Also, it is possible that the well-known, divergent response to irritants is due to
intraindividual variations in the skin irritation response (35–37). This is a relatively new idea,
and therefore further studies need to be conducted in this area before a definitive statement
Table 3
Potent Factors that Might Influence Refinement of Interpretation in Future Investigations
Experimental design
Baseline versus “stress” test differences
Anatomic site
Open versus occluded irritant stresses
Ethnic groups in the same versus varying geography
Comparable climatic conditions
Presentation of hard data and statistical analysis
514
Modjtahedi et al.

=== Page 532 ===
can be made linking intraindividual variation to ethnic differences in the intensity of an
irritation response.
The above discussion is clearly limited in scope when considering the wide array of
ethnic groups present globally. Considerable work remains to be done before the role of
ethnicity in ICD is fully appreciated. Future investigations, such as that conducted by Peters
et al. on Punjabi and Tamil subjects (38), is required before the interplay between skin and
ethnicity can be completely defined.
REFERENCES
1. Hjorth N, Fregert S. Contact dermatitis. In: Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJG, eds. Textbook of
Dermatology. Oxford: Blackwell, 1968:Ch. 4.
2. Malten KE. Thoughts on irritant dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1981; 7:238–247.
3. Wesley N, Maibach HI. Racial (ethnic) differences in skin properties: the objective data. Am J Clin
Dermatol 2003; 4(12):843–860.
4. NORA. Allergic & Irritant Dermatitis. 11 June 1999. Center for Disease Control. April 9, 2002.
Available at http://www.cdc.goc/niosh/nrderm.html.
5. Wilkison JD, Rycroft RJG. Contact dermatitis. In: Rook A, Wilkinson DS, Ebling FJG, eds. Textbook of
Dermatology. 4th ed. Oxford: Blackwell, 1986:vol1:435–532.
6. Lammintausta K, Maibach HI. Exogenous and endogenous factors in skin irritation. Int J Dermatol
1988; 27:213–222.
7. Mathias CGT, Maibach HI. Dermatoxicology monographs I. Cutaneous irritation: factors influencing
the response to irritants. Clin Toxicol 1978; 13:333–346.
8. Wilheim KP, Maibach H. Factors predisposing cutaneous irritation. Dermatol Clin 1990; 8:17–22.
9. Berardesca E, Maibach H. Racial differences in skin pathophysiology. J Am Acad Dermatol 1996;
34:667–672.
10. Berardesca E, de Rigal J, Leveque JL, et al. In vivo biophysical characterization of skin physiological
differences in races. Dermatologica 1991; 182:89–93.
11. Benardesca E, Maibach HI. Contact dermatitis in Blacks. Dermatol Clin 1988; 6(3):363–368.
12. Robinson MK. Population differences in skin structure and physiology and the susceptibility to
irritant and allergic contact dermatitis: implications for skin safety and risk assessment. Contact
Dermatitis 1999; 41:65–79.
13. Marshal EK, Lynch V, Smith HW. On dichlorethylsulphide (mustard gas) II. Variations in
susceptibility of the skin to dichlorethylsulphide. J Pharm Exp Therap 1919; 12:291–301.
14. Weigand DA, Mershon MM. The cutaneous irritant reaction to agent O-chlorobenzylidene (CS).
Edgewood Arsenal Technical Report 4332, February 1970.
15. Guy RH, Tur E, Bjerke S, et al. Are there age and racial differences to methyl nicotinate – induced
vasodilation in human skin? J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 12:1001–1006.
16. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Cutaneous reactive hyperaemia: racial differences induced by corticoid
application. Br J Dermatol 1989; 120:787–794.
17. Berardesca E, Maibach HI. Racial difference in sodium lauryl sulphate induced cutaneous irritation:
black and white. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 18:65–70.
18. Gean CJ, Tur E, Maibach HI, et al. Cutaneous responses to topical methyl nicotinate in black, oriental,
and Caucasian subjects. Arch Dermatol Res 1989; 281:95–98.
19. Anderson KE, Maibach HI. Black and white human skin differences. J Am Acad Dermatol 1976; 1:
276–282.
20. Buckley CE III, Lee KL, Burdick DS. Methacoline induced cutaneous flare response: bivariate analysis
of responsiveness and sensitivity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1982; 69:25–34.
21. Weigand DA, Gaylor JR. Irritant reaction in Negro and Caucasian skin. South Med J 1974; 67:548–551.
22. Thomson ML. Relative efficiency of pigment and horny layer thickness in protecting the skin of
europeans and africans against solar ultraviolet radiation. J Physiol (Lond) 1955; 127:236–238.
23. Rienerston RP, Wheatley VR. Studies on the chemical composition of human epidermal lipids. J Invest
Dermatol 1959; 32:49–51.
24. Corcuff P, Lotte C, Rougier A, et al. Racial differences in corneocytes. Acta Derm Venereol
(Stockholm) 1991; 71:146–148.
25. Sugino K, Imokawa G, Maibach H. Ethnic difference of stratum corneum lipid in relation to stratum
corneum function [Abstract]. J Invest. Dermatol 1993; 100:597.
26. Johnson LC, Corah NL. Racial differences in skin resistance. Science 1963; 139:766–769.
27. Flusher JW, Kuss O, Diepgen T, et al. Testing for irritation with a multifactorial approach: comparison
of eight non-invasive measuring techniques of five different irritation types. Br J Dermatol 2001;
145:696–703.
Ethnicity as a Possible Endogenous Factor in ICD
515

=== Page 533 ===
28. Rapaport, M. Patch testing in Japanese subjects. Contact Dermatitis 1984; 11:93–97.
29. Basketter DA, Griffith HA, Wang XA, et al. Individual, ethnic and seasonal variability in irritant
susceptibility of skin: the implications for a predictive human patch test. Contact Dermatitis 1996;
35:208–213.
30. Goh CL, Chia SE. Skin irritability to sodium lauryl sulphate—as measured by skin water loss—by sex
and race. Clin Exp Dermatol 1988; 13:16–19.
31. Foy V, Weinkauf R, Whittle E, et al. Ethnic variation in the skin irritation response. Contact Dermatitis
2001; 45(6):346–349.
32. Robinson MK. Racial differences in acute and cumulative skin irritation responses between Caucasian
and Asian populations. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 42:134–143.
33. Robinson MK, Perkins MA, Basketter DA. Application of a 4-h human test patch method for
comparative and investigative assessment of skin irritation. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:194–202.
34. Robinson MK. Population differences in acute skin irritation responses. Contact Dermatitis 2002;
46(2):86–92.
35. Robinson MK. Intra-individual variations in acute and cumulative skin irritation responses. Contact
Dermatitis 2001; 45:75–83.
36. Judge MR, Griffith HA, Basketter DA, et al. Variations in response of human skin to irritant challenge.
Contact Dermatitis 1996; 34:115–117.
37. McFadden JP, Wakelin SH, Basketter DA. Acute irritation thresholds in subjects with type I-type V1
skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:147–149.
38. Peters L, Marriott M, Mukerji B, et al. The effect of population diversity on skin irritation. Contact
Dermatitis 2006; 55(6):357–363.
516
Modjtahedi et al.

=== Page 534 ===
50
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing on
SkinEthicTM-Reconstituted Human Epidermis:
Reproducibility for 50 Chemicals Tested with
Two Protocols
Carine Tornier and Martin Rosdy
SkinEthic Laboratories, Nice, France
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Evaluation of the irritancy potential to human skin of any chemical or formulation used in the
chemical, pharmaceutical, and cosmetics industries is a necessity. Several in vivo and in vitro
tests aim to determine the risk of irritation resulting from the contact between these
compounds and human skin. The most commonly used test is the rabbit skin irritation test
described in the OECD test guideline 404 and in the European Chemicals Bureau Annex V part
B.4 (http://ecb.jrc.it/testing-methods/) and initially described by Draize et al. (1). This animal
test consists in topically applying substances, which are raw materials or, depending on
regulations, formulations (i.e., finished products), on the rabbit’s shaved skin. A score is
attributed according to physiological observations on the animals, which allows the
classification of each tested product.
However, the Draize test presents several major disadvantages. The first is due to the fact
that rabbit skin and human skin have different physiological properties and responses to
environmental and chemical agents (2–5). Unfortunately, the biological basis for the variability
of skin irritation among species remains unknown (6). Rabbit data have often been taken as
reference to determine the irritant potential of chemicals although, to the exception of rare
publications (2,4), few studies have compared data obtained both on animals and humans.
Some compounds are more toxic for rabbits than for humans and vice versa (2,4,7). Moreover,
the Draize test lacks reproducibility (8,9). The third major inconvenience concerns animal
suffering and discomfort since eschar formation can be observed with severe irritants.
Few experiments were done on humans because of direct risk of lesion and intoxication
for the subject, resulting from the application of potentially dangerous compounds. Among the
available human data on chemical toxicity, some derive from chemical insults with severe
irritants due to accidents at home or work or due to repeated skin exposure to moderate
irritants. The other human data for skin irritation testing were obtained by patch testing
performed on relatively high numbers of volunteers (4,10–16). Compounds were tested pure or
diluted, for different application times, but the experiments were stopped when moderate to
severe reactions to the test compound were observed. Many parameters influence the
reproducibility of this type of tests. First, variability is observed in function of the patches used.
York et al. (17) showed that generally the “Webril” and the “Hill Top” patches produced
greater reactivity than the “Van der Bend” and the “Finn” patches. Some other parameters
responsible for the variability of test results are directly correlated with the choice of the
volunteers: the interindividual variability of reactivity is the principal factor (18). Moreover,
interethnic differences have been observed (19,20). The reactivity of human skin changes also
with the anatomical site (21) and decreases with age (20). Even abiotic factors must be
considered since the seasonal variability plays a role in skin reactivity (22,23). The seasonal
effect was particularly evident in the experiment described by Basketter et al. (18) when a four-
hour patch test with SDS 20% provoked skin irritation in 45% of the volunteers in summer, but
increased to 91% in winter.

=== Page 535 ===
The development of in vitro alternative methods for testing skin irritation has been the
aim of an increasing number of scientists. This can be explained by their ethical advantage, and
in several cases, also by their enhanced convenience. The skin irritation function test (SIFT) (24)
and the pig ear test (25) are two of these in vitro methods. These tests are thus performed on ex
vivo animal tissues (mouse and pig, respectively).
To permit the testing on human tissues without the disadvantages of performing
tests directly on humans, the development of cell and tissue culture appeared promising.
Several models are now commercially available for testing skin irritation (26–30). Using
reconstructed epidermis, all classical methods determining cell viability (such as MTT
reduction, resazurin reduction, LDH release) are easy to perform. Moreover, the SkinEthicTM
model allows the measurement of additional endpoints such as the release of IL-1a and IL-8
(28,31–33). Reconstructed epidermis consists of human epidermal cells cultured in chemi-
cally defined medium by using semiautomatic production procedures, producing human
epidermis standardized in terms of thickness, terminal differentiation, and reactivity to test
compounds.
The repeated experiments described here are performed on different batches of human
reconstructed epidermis. They correspond to different production cycles using epidermal cells
of different donors. In vitro experimentation allows testing compounds on human tissues
whatever the age, gender, and race of the donor. Each of the 50 chemicals has, at least, been
tested in triplicate in two different experiments using two protocols: an in vitro patch test and a
direct topical application test. The in vitro patch test protocol mimics closely the human in vivo
patch test protocol (14). We applied the compounds on 0.95-cm2 polypropylen Hill Top
chambers1 (Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.) for four hours. The quantity of chemicals applied is
proportional to the size of the patches (0.95 cm2) used. This technique allows the containment
of the product on a determined surface in the center of the 4 cm2 epidermis. In parallel, our
direct topical application test is performed by applying 100 mL of the test compound directly
onto the epidermal surface of 0.63 cm2 for four hours. Among the 50 chosen chemicals,
20 chemicals were previously tested in the ECVAM pre-validation study (PVS chemicals) on
acute skin irritation (25) and 30 chemicals were previously tested in the in vivo human patch
test (HPT) described by Basketter et al. (14) (HPT chemicals). After test compound application,
tissues were incubated at 378C, 5% CO2 for four hours in both protocols. The 20 PVS chemicals
were tested in two additional separate experiments using the direct topical application
protocol (4 times in total). Multiple endpoint analysis including cell viability (MTT reduction),
histology, and IL-1a release measurements was performed. Absence of direct interaction
between test chemicals and the MTT solution or nonspecifically on frozen-killed tissues was
verified. Our goal was to study the reproducibility of reference chemical testing on epidermis
with two convenient protocols, and to compare the results with available in vitro, as well as
animal and human in vivo data.
SKIN MODELS AND TESTS
Reconstituted Human Epidermis
Tissues (SkinEthicTM, Nice, France) used were fully differentiated three-dimensional
reconstituted human epidermal cultures grown on the air-liquid interface for 17 days in
defined growth medium (27,34). Each experiment was performed in triplicate on one single
tissue production batch, but different batches (different production cycles and/or donor cells)
were used for each repeated experiment.
Selection and Coding of Test Chemicals
We chose reference chemicals upon two criteria: their irritation status should have been
defined in the European Community classification, and, furthermore, they should have been
tested either on other three-dimensional models (25) or by the human in vivo patch test (14).
The present study includes irritant and nonirritant compounds. Details of the 50 chemicals
tested are in Table 1. The experiment performed on run B was realized as a blind test. The 20
HPT chemicals were coded by H. Maibach, UCSF, United States.
518
Tornier et al.

=== Page 536 ===
Table 1
Chemicals tested and corresponding skin irritation data
Compound
CAS no.
Supplier
EU class.
OECD class.
Human patch class.
S/L
1
Sodium lauryl sulphate (50%)
151-21-3
Sigma
Ia
Ia
L
2
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
71-55-6
Aldrich
Ia
Ia
L
3
Potassium hydroxide (5%)
1310-58-3
JT Baker
Ia
Ia
L
4
Heptanal
111-71-7
Aldrich
Ia
Ia
L
5
Methyl palmitate
112-39-0
Aldrich
Ia/NC b
Ia
NCb
L
6
Lilestralis / Lilial
80-54-6
Aroma & Fine Chemical
Ia
Ia
L
7
1-Bromopentane
110-53-2
Aldrich
Ia
Ia
L
8
dl-Citronellol
106-22-9
Aldrich
Ia
SLIa
L
9
d-Limonene
5989-27-5
Aldrich
Ia
SLIa
L
10
10-Undecenoic acid
112-38-9
Aldrich
Ia
SLIa
L
11
Dimethyl disulphide
624-92-0
Lancaster
NIa
SLIa
L
12
Soap from 20/80 coconut oil/tallow
Quimasso
NIa
NIa
S
13
cis-Cyclooctene
931-87-3
Aldrich
NIa
SLIa
L
14
2-Methyl-4-phenyl-2-butanol
103-05-9
Aldrich
NIa
NIa
L
15
2,4-Xylidine
95-68-1
Aldrich
NIa
NIa
L
16
Hydroxycitronellal
107-75-5
Astier-Demarest-Leroux
NIa
NIa
L
17
3,3’-Dithiodipropionic acid
1119-62-6
Aldrich
NIa
NIa
S
18
4,4-Methylene bis-(2,6-ditert-butyl)phenol
118-82-1
Aldrich
NIa
NIa
S
19
4-Amino-1,2,4-triazole
584-13-4
Aldrich
NIa
NIa
S
20
3-Chloronitrobenzene
121-73-3
Aldrich
NIa
NIa
S
21
1-Decanol
112-30-1
Aldrich
R38b
NCb
L
22
2-Propanol
67-63-0
Aldrich
NCb
NCb
L
23
Isopropyl palmitate
142-91-6
Aldrich
NCb
NCb
L
24
Octanoic acid
124-07-2
Aldrich
R34b
R38b
L
25
Methyl caproate
106-70-7
Aldrich
NCb
NCb
L
26
Methyl laurate
111-82-0
Aldrich
R38b
NCb
L
27
Decanoic acid
334-48-5
Aldrich
R38b
R38b
L
28
Dodecanoic acid
143-07-7
Aldrich
R38b
NCb
L
29
N,N-Dimethyl-N-dodecyl aminobetaine (20%)
Albright & Wilson
R38b
R38b
L
30
Benzalkonium chloride (10%)
8001-54-5
Sigma
R38b
R38b
L
31
Dimethyl sulphoxide
67-68-5
Sigma
NCb
R38b
L
32
Polyethylene glycol 400
25322-68-3
Aldrich
NCb
NCb
L
33
Acetic acid (10%)
64-19-7
Sigma
R38b
NCb
L
34
Hydrochloric acid (10%)
7647-01-0
Prolabo
R38b
NCb
L
35
Sodium hydroxide (0.5%)
1310-73-2
Sigma
R38b
R38b
L
36
Heptanoic acid
111-14-8
Aldrich
R34b
R38b
L
(Continued )
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
519

=== Page 537 ===
Table 1
Chemicals tested and corresponding skin irritation data (Continued )
Compound
CAS no.
Supplier
EU class.
OECD class.
Human patch class.
S/L
37
Lactic acid
50-21-5
Aldrich
NCb
R38b
L
38
Benzyl alcohol
100-51-6
Aldrich
NCb
NCb
L
39
Triethanolamine
102-71-6
Aldrich
NCb
NCb
L
40
Dodecanol
112-53-8
Aldrich
NCb
NCb
L
41
Tween 80
9005-65-6
Sigma
NCb
NCb
L
42
Benzalkonium chloride (7.5%)
8001-54-5
Sigma
R38b
R38b
L
43
Propylene glycol
4254-14-2
Fluka
NCb
NCb
L
44
Octanol
111-87-5
Aldrich
R38b
NCb
L
45
Eugenol
97-53-0
Sigma
R38b
NCb
L
46
Geraniol
106-24-1
Sigma
R38b
NCb
L
47
Linalyl acetate
115-95-7
Aldrich
R38b
NCb
L
48
Hexanol
111-27-3
Aldrich
R38b
NCb
L
49
a-Terpineol
10482-56-1
Aldrich
R38b
NCb
L
50
Ethanol
64-17-5
Merck
NCb
NCb
L
I ¼ Irritant, NI ¼ Non Irritant, SLI ¼ Slight Irritant, S ¼ Solid, L ¼ Liquid.
aFentem et al., 2001.
bBasketter et al., 1999.
520
Tornier et al.

=== Page 538 ===
In Vitro Direct Topical Test Protocol
Three reconstituted epidermal tissues of 0.63 cm2 on 0.3-mL-defined maintenance medium in a
24-well plate were used per control or tested compound. Test compounds of 100 mL or 100 mg
were homogeneously displayed on the total surface of the reconstructed epidermis. Negative
controls and positive controls were run in parallel for each experiment. Cultures were
incubated for four hours at 378C, 5% CO2. The three cultures were then transferred into new
wells of the same 24-well plate containing 0.3 mL of maintenance medium. Tissues were
washed three times with 0.5-mL saline solution A. With solids (powders or crystals), the insert
was turned upside down before washing and—maintained in this position with forceps—
knocked two- to threefold on the inner wall of a beaker to mechanically remove most of the
applied compound. Histology, MTT reduction, and IL-1a release endpoints were measured as
described below. Untreated tissues and H2O-treated tissues were used as negative controls,
while SDS 20% (14,25) and nonanoic acid–treated tissues (35) were used as positive controls.
Negative controls were considered satisfactory if three criteria were met: a high cell viability
measured by MTT reduction ( 85% of untreated epidermis), a normal histology (score  75)
(see histology scoring below), and no release of large amounts of IL-1a (< 30 pg/mL). Positive
controls were considered satisfactory when a low cell viability was measured by MTT
reduction (< 50%) and when a necrosed histology (score < 75) and an increase of the amount
of secreted IL-1a ( 30 pg/mL) were observed.
In Vitro Patch Test Protocol
Three reconstituted epidermal tissues of 4 cm2, placed on 1-mL-defined maintenance medium
in a 6-well plate, were used per control or test compound. A measure of 75 mL of the compound
was homogeneously displayed on a 0.95 cm2 Hill Top chamber (Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.), which
was immediately applied, carefully, to the center of a 4 cm2 culture. In case of solid compounds,
75 mg of the powder or crystals was spread on 0.95 cm2 (same surface as for liquids) on the
center of the culture and covered immediately by a Hill Top chamber. A 5-mm large brush was
used to improve the contact between the compound/patch and the epidermal tissue. The
patches were homogeneously applied with delicacy; strong pressure was avoided. Negative
controls and positive controls were performed in parallel for each experiment. The Hill Top
chamber was removed after a four-hour incubation at 378C, 5% CO2. No washing step was
included in this protocol because most liquid compounds were absorbed by the patch. With
solids, the culture was turned upside down, and—maintained in this position with forceps—
knocked two- to threefold on the inner wall of a beaker to mechanically remove most of the
applied compound. Histology, MTT reduction, and IL-1a release endpoints were performed as
described below. Untreated tissues and H2O-treated tissues were used as negative controls,
while SDS 20% (14,25) and nonanoic acid–treated tissues (35) were used as positive controls.
Negative controls were considered satisfactory if three criteria were met: a high cell viability
measured by MTT reduction ( 85% of untreated epidermis), a normal histology ( 75) (see
histology scoring below) and no release of large amounts of IL-1a (< 105 pg/mL). Positive
controls were considered satisfactory when a low cell viability was measured by MTT reduction
(< 50%) and when a necrosed histology (< 75) and an increase of the amount of secreted IL-1a
( 105 pg/mL) were observed.
Histology
Per test condition, and whatever the protocol, one of three tissues was harvested for histology.
The tissues were fixed in a balanced 10% formalin solution and embedded in paraffin. Vertical
sections measuring 4 mm were stained with hematoxylin/eosin and photographed under a
microscope.
Scoring of histology sections was performed as follows:
l No or minor epidermal changes: 100
l Slight epidermal changes (stratum corneum thickening and/or dissociation and/or
parakeratosis; slight edema and/or cellular alterations in the viable layers): 75
l Severe epidermal changes (marked edema and/or less viable cell layers and/or cellular
alterations and/or partial tissue necrosis and/or partial tissue disintegration): 25
l Total tissue necrosis and/or tissue disintegration: 0
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
521

=== Page 539 ===
Cell Viability Measurement by MTT Reduction
The MTT test was used to measure the viability of living cells via mitochondrial
dehydrogenase activity (36). The ring of 3-[4,5-dimethyl-thiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide (MTT), yellow, is cleaved by dehydrogenases, yielding blue/purple MTT crystals,
which are insoluble in culture medium. An intense purple color is observed when the tissue is
healthy, while the culture remains white when necrosis occurred.
Per test condition, the two remaining tissues were incubated in a 0.5 mg/mL MTT
solution (0.3 mL MTT for 0.63 cm2 cultures, and in 1 mL MTT for 4 cm2 cultures) for a three-
hour incubation at 378C, 5% CO2. MTT crystals of 0.63 cm2 inserts were dissolved in 2 mL
isopropanol. In the case of the 4 cm2 inserts, a 0.5 cm2 biopsy from the treated center of the
culture was harvested using a 8-mm diameter biopsy punch (Stiefel) and plunged in 1 mL
isopropanol. After an overnight extraction at room temperature, the quantification of cell
viability was obtained by comparing the optical density of the extracts measured at 570 nm
(reference filter 690 nm) in percentage to the negative H2O-treated controls.
IL-1a Release
Conditioned media (3 per test condition) underneath the epidermal cultures were collected
after the four-hour incubation with the chemicals and kept frozen at –208C. Inflammatory
mediator IL-1a was measured quantitatively using ELISA kits (R&D Systems, U.K., Catalogue
number DLA50) (31,32). Results were expressed in picogram of mediator released per milliliter
of conditioned medium.
Direct Interaction Between MTT and Chemicals
A measure of 100 mL or 100 mg of each compound was incubated in 1 mL MTT solution
(0.5 mg/mL) for three hours at 378C, 5% CO2. The interaction was quantified by measuring the
MTT/compound mixture OD value (200 mL in triplicate) at 570 nm (reference filter 690 nm).
MTT Interaction with Chemicals on Frozen-Killed Controls
The same procedure as for the direct topical application test protocol was applied onto frozen-
killed tissues (–208C, overnight). The results were expressed as the percentage of fold increase
compared with the corresponding value of nontreated living control tissues.
Prediction Models
To classify the chemicals as irritants or nonirritants, we propose a prediction model based on
the three endpoints described above. A chemical was classified as nonirritant when two or
three of the endpoints led to the following results: cell viability measured by MTT reduction
over 50% compared with that of the H2O-treated control, normal histology (score  75), and a
release of IL-1a comparable to that observed for the H2O-treated control (< 30 pg/mL for the
direct topical application test and  105 pg/mL for the in vitro patch test).
On the contrary, a chemical was classified as irritant since two or three of the endpoints
measured corresponded to the following criteria: cell viability lower than 50% compared with
that of the H2O-treated control, partial or total necrosis of the epidermal tissues (score < 75),
and an amount of secreted IL-1a higher than the IL-1a release induced by the H2O-treated
control ( 30 pg/mL for the direct topical application test and  105 pg/mL for the in vitro
patch test).
In parallel, a single endpoint prediction model (viability by MTT reduction only) was
used for comparison.
Statistical Analysis
Specificity corresponds to the percentage of nonirritant chemicals (according to the EU
classification) identified as nonirritants in our test.
Sensitivity represents the percentage of irritant chemicals (according to the EU
classification) identified as irritants in our test.
Accuracy corresponds to the overall percentage of correct classification.
Pearson correlations, slope, and variation coefficient were calculated by Dr. Els Adriaens
(University of Gent, Belgium).
522
Tornier et al.

=== Page 540 ===
RESULTS OF THE TESTS
MTT Interaction with Chemicals
Most of the compounds did not present significant interaction with MTT, nor directly, nor on
frozen-killed controls. However, these two additional control experiments have shown that the
interaction was significant for three chemicals (eugenol, potassium hydroxide 5%, and
heptanal) for at least one of the two experiments. First, a direct contact between eugenol and
MTT solution quickly produced a dark blue/purple color (OD ¼ 1.4), while, in parallel, the
MTT solution alone remained yellow (OD ¼ 0.0). Moreover, eugenol on frozen-killed
epidermal tissues induced the change of color from white to dark blue/purple after a four-
hour incubation. The dissolution of the formazan blue crystals in isopropanol exhibited an OD
value, which represented 82.2% of the OD value obtained for living untreated tissues (with the
other 47 compounds, the epidermal tissues remained uncolored, and the OD values were
negligible). Nevertheless, a strong direct interaction between a compound and MTT solution
was not always correlated with an increased MTT value during the tests on living tissues or
even on killed tissues. For example, 5% potassium hydroxide strongly reduced the MTT
solution after direct contact, leading to a dark blue/purple mixture (OD ¼ 1.6). On the
contrary, 5% potassium hydroxide on frozen-killed tissues led to a light blue color of the
culture. The corresponding OD value represented only 14.4% of the living untreated culture.
Finally, in the case of heptanal, direct contact with the MTT solution provoked a change of
color to blue (OD ¼ 0.2). The application of heptanal on frozen-killed tissues led also to a blue
color, with an OD value of 35% of the living untreated tissues.
In Vitro Direct Topical Test
Results of the multiple endpoint analysis of the repeated experiments are in Fig. 1 (PVS
chemicals) and Fig. 2 (HPT chemicals). The percentage of cell viability (MTT reduction) is
expressed in comparison to the H2O-treated control. All controls of each experiment were
satisfactory according to our criteria. Moreover, results obtained with the blind test were
completely comparable to the normal test.
Figure 1
Multiple endpoint analysis for the PVS chemicals with the direct topical application test: (c) run D, (g)
run E, () run G, (.) run H. (A) Viability (MTT reduction assay). (B) IL-1alpha release. (C) Histological
observations. (See next page for Parts B and C.)
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
523

=== Page 541 ===
The response of the epidermal tissues to the chemicals could be classified in five families
(Tables 2 and 3). The first is composed of compounds that induced a response comparable to the
negative controls. The second family consists of the chemicals, which allowed a high cell viabi-
lity, a normal histology (score  75), but provoked an increase of IL-1a release ( 30 pg/mL).
The third family is represented by chemicals, which allowed a cell viability higher than 50%, but
necrosis was visible on corresponding histological sections (score < 75), and an increase of the
amount of IL-1a ( 30 pg/mL) release was measured. The fourth family includes chemicals,
which induced low cell viability, tissue necrosis (score < 75), but no release of large amounts of
IL-1a (< 30 pg/mL). All remaining chemicals belong to the fifth and last family. This family is
composed of the chemicals, which were responsible for a low tissue viability, tissue necrosis
(score < 75), and a significant increase of secreted IL-1a ( 30 pg/mL). Whatever the family, we
observed that in most cases the MTT values were of the same range for a given chemical. For
example, among the 20 PVS chemicals, for which four independent experiments were
Figure 1
(Continued )
524
Tornier et al.

=== Page 542 ===
performed, dimethyl disulfide–induced MTT values contained between 2.0% and 3.4% of
negative control values; for heptanal they were contained between 33.1% and 36.0%, and for 3,3’-
dithiodipropionic acid between 82.6% and 96.2%. Similarly, the histological appreciations were
highly reproducible, especially when a given chemical was responsible for specific histological
effects. Regarding the IL-1a release values, a reproducible effect was obtained. The chemicals
induced two kinds of effects: on one hand, some compounds were responsible for an IL-1a
release comparable to those of negative controls (e.g., methyl palmitate) and, on the other hand,
some compounds provoked a significant increase of IL-1a release compared with negative
controls ( 30 pg/mL), although the absolute values presented high variations. For example, d-
limonene provoked large amounts of released IL-1a (404.2–1055.9 pg/mL), and these amounts
were higher than those of the 20% SDS-treated positive control tissues.
Figure 2
Multiple endpoint analysis for the HPT chemicals with the direct topical application test: (c) run A, (g)
run B, () run F, (.) run I. (A) Viability (MTT reduction assay). (B) IL-1alpha release. (C) Histological observations.
(See next page for Part C.)
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
525

=== Page 543 ===
Figure 2
(Continued )
Table 2
Comparison of the results obtained with the 20 ECVAM chemicals
Compound
EU
class.
OECD
class.
Epiderm
class.a
Episkin
class.a
SkinEthic dir.
appl. (family)
class.
SkinEthic
patch (family)
class.
1
Sodium lauryl sulphate (50%)
Ia
Ia
I
I
(4) I
(5) I
2
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
Ia
Ia
NI
I
(5) I
(5) I
3
Potassium hydroxide (5%)
Ia
Ia
I
I
(4) I
(5) I
4
Heptanal
Ia
Ia
I
I
(5) I
(5) I
5
Methyl palmitate
Ia/NCb
Ia
NI
NI
(1) NI
(1) NI
6
Lilestralis/Lilial
Ia
Ia
I
I
(2) NI
(1) NI
7
1-Bromopentane
Ia
Ia
I
I
(5) I
(3) I
8
dl-Citronellol
Ia
SLIa
I
I
(5) I
(3) I
9
d-Limonene
Ia
SLIa
I
I
(5) I
(3) I
10
10-Undecenoic acid
Ia
SLIa
NI
NI
(5) I
(5) I
11
Dimethyl disulphide
NIa
SLIa
I
I
(5) I
(4) I
12
Soap from 20/80 coconut oil/
tallow
NIa
NIa
NI
NI
(1) NI
(1) NI
13
cis-Cyclooctene
NIa
SLIa
I
I
(5) I
(3) I
14
2-Methyl-4-phenyl-2-butanol
NIa
NIa
I
I
(5) I
(5) I
15
2,4-Xylidine
NIa
NIa
I
I
(5) I
(5) I
16
Hydroxycitronellal
NIa
NIa
I
I
(5) I
(6) NI
17
3,3’-Dithiodipropionic acid
NIa
NIa
NI
NI
(1) NI
(1) NI
18
4,4-Methylene bis-(2,6-ditert-
butyl)phenol
NIa
NIa
NI
NI
(1) NI
(1) NI
19
4-Amino-1,2,4-triazole
NIa
NIa
NI
NI
(3) NI/I
(2) NI
20
3-Chloronitrobenzene
NIa
NIa
I
I
(2) NI
(1) NI
I ¼ Irritant, NI ¼ Non Irritant, SLI ¼ Slight Irritant, NC ¼ Non Classified.
Family 1: high cell viability, normal histology, no release of large amounts of IL-1a release.
Family 2: high cell viability, normal histology, increase of the amount of IL-1a.
Family 3: high cell viability, necrosed histology, increase of the amount of IL-1a.
Family 4: low cell viability, necrosed histology, no release of large amounts of IL-1a release.
Family 5: low cell viability, necrosed histology, increase of the amount of IL-1a.
Family 6: high cell viability, necrosed histology, no release of large amounts of IL-1a release.
aFentem et al., 2001.
bBasketter et al., 1999.
526
Tornier et al.

=== Page 544 ===
According to our prediction of a model based on multiple endpoint analysis, the first and
second families contained nonirritants, and the third, fourth, and fifth families contained
irritants. The resulting classification is shown in Tables 2 and 3. A strong reproducibility was
obtained between separate experiments. The one single exception for the 50 chemicals tested
with this protocol was 4-amino-1,2,4-triazole (irritant in two and nonirritant in the two other
experiments).
In Vitro Patch Test
Fig. 3 (PVS chemicals) and Fig. 4 (HPT chemicals) show the results obtained by multiple
endpoint analysis with the in vitro patch test. As for the in vitro direct topical application test
results (described above), both negative and positive controls were satisfactory. However, note
that the amount of released IL-1a was four- to fivefold higher for the H2O-treated control
compared with that of the direct topical test. The ratio of medium volume to tissue surface was
0.48 mL/cm2 for 0.63 cm2 tissues, compared with 0.25 mL/cm2 for 4 cm2 tissues. Also,
the topical application of an empty patch induces a slight increase of basal IL-1a secretion.
We thus considered that the level of released IL-1a had increased significantly when it was
over 105 pg/mL. Moreover, the cell viability of the positive controls of the patch test was
Table 3
Comparison of the results obtained with the 30 chemicals tested in human patch test
Compound
EU
class.a
Human patch
class.a
SkinEthic direct
appl. (family) class.
SkinEthic patch
(family) class.
21
1-Decanol
R38
NC
(3) I
(3) I
22
2-Propanol
NC
NC
(5) I
(6) NI
23
Isopropyl palmitate
NC
NC
(1) NI
(1) NI
24
Octanoic acid
R34
R38
(5) I
(5) I
25
Methyl caproate
NC
NC
(5) I
(5) I
26
Methyl laurate
R38
NC
(1) NI
(2) NI
27
Decanoic acid
R38
R38
(5) I
(4) I
28
Dodecanoic acid
R38
NC
(5) I
(3/6) I
29
N,N-dimethyl-N-dodecyl aminobetaine
R38
R38
(5) I
(1/3) NI / I
30
Benzalkonium chloride (10%)
R38
R38
(5) I
(5) I
31
Dimethyl sulphoxide
NC
R38
(5) I
(3/6) NI / I
32
Polyethylene glycol 400
NC
NC
(2) NI
(1) NI
33
Acetic acid (10%)
R38
NC
(4) I
(4) I
34
Hydrochloric acid (10%)
R38
NC
(4) I
(6) NI
35
Sodium hydroxide (0.5%)
R38
R38
(5) I
(1) NI
36
Heptanoic acid
R34
R38
(4) I
(5) I
37
Lactic acid
NC
R38
(4) I
(4) I
38
Benzyl alcohol
NC
NC
(4) I
(5) I
39
Triethanolamine
NC
NC
(3) I
(1) NI
40
Dodecanol
NC
NC
(2) NI
(1) NI
41
Tween 80
NC
NC
(2) NI
(1) NI
42
Benzalkonium chloride (7.5%)
R38
R38
(5) I
(5) I
43
Propylene glycol
NC
NC
(2) NI
(1) NI
44
Octanol
R38
NC
(5) I
(5) I
45
Eugenol
R38
NC
(3) I
(5) I
46
Geraniol
R38
NC
(5) I
(5) I
47
Linalyl acetate
R38
NC
(5) I
(3) I
48
Hexanol
R38
NC
(5) I
(5) I
49
a-Terpineol
R38
NC
(5) I
(5) I
50
Ethanol
NC
NC
(5) I
(1) NI
R38 / I = Irritant, NC = Non Classified, R34 = corrosive, NI = Non Irritant.
Family 1: high cell viability, normal histology, no release of large amounts of IL-1a release.
Family 2: high cell viability, normal histology, increase of the amount of IL-1a.
Family 3: high cell viability, necrosed histology, increase of the amount of IL-1a.
Family 4: low cell viability, necrosed histology, no release of large amounts of IL-1a release.
Family 5: low cell viability, necrosed histology, increase of the amount of IL-1a.
Family 6: high cell viability, necrosed histology, no release of large amounts of IL-1a release.
aBasketter et al., 1999.
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
527

=== Page 545 ===
higher compared with those of the direct topical application test. More generally in this
protocol, the percentage of cell viability was increased in most test conditions compared with
the direct topical application protocol; this was probably due to the lower amounts (50%) of
test chemicals, which, moreover, were applied to, and partially absorbed by the patches.
The same classification in families as for the direct topical test was applied to the
experiments performed with this patch test protocol. However, a new sixth family has been
created for hydroxycitronellal, 2-propanol, and 10% hydrochloric acid, which allowed a high
cell viability and a small amount of IL-1a release, but provoked tissue necrosis as shown in
histology sections.
The same prediction model as for the direct topical test was applied to the patch test
results (Tables 2 and 3). A high intra-laboratory reproducibility could also be observed with
this protocol to the exception of 20% N,N-dimethyl-N-dodecyl aminobetaine, dimethyl
Figure 3
Multiple endpoint analysis for the PVS chemicals with the in vitro patch test: (c) run D, (g) run E. (A)
Viability (MTT reduction assay). (B) IL-1alpha release. (C) Histological observations.
528
Tornier et al.

=== Page 546 ===
sulfoxide, and dodecanoic acid, which were classified as irritant in one experiment and as
nonirritant in the other.
Comparison Between the Two Test Protocols
The comparison (Tables 2 and 3) between the predictions of the direct topical application test,
and those of the in vitro patch test, shows that even when the experiments were performed
using two protocols, the final results were similar for most chemicals. However, the direct
topical application test seemed more sensitive, since hydroxycitronellal, 2-propanol, 20% N,N-
dimethyl-N-dodecyl aminobetaine, 10% hydrochloric acid, 0.5% sodium hydroxide,
Figure 4
Multiple endpoint analysis for the HPT chemicals with the in vitro patch test: (c) run C, (g) run J.
(A) Viability (MTT reduction assay). (B) IL-1alpha release. (C) Histological observations. (See next page for
Parts B and C.)
Figure 3
(Continued )
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
529

=== Page 547 ===
triethanolamine, and ethanol were detected as irritants with this protocol, while they appeared
to be nonirritant with the in vitro patch test. These differences are discussed below.
Table 2 presents a summary of test results for the 20 PVS chemicals, including existing
EU and OECD classifications, based on rabbit test results, as well as in vitro test results
obtained with other tissue models [SkinEthicTM direct topical application test, SkinEthicTM
in vitro patch test, EpiskinTM, Lyon, France, and EpiDermTM, MatTek Corp., Massachusetts,
U.S. (25)]. All in vitro tissue models showed similar classifications of compounds whatever the
tissue supplier. On the opposite, the comparison between the rabbit data and the human in
vitro data revealed differences. In particular, this was true for the following compounds:
dimethyl disulfide, cis-cyclooctene, 2-methyl-4-phenyl-2-butanol, and 2,4-xylidine. These
compounds were classified as irritants by all the in vitro tests, and as nonirritants or slightly
irritants according to the EU and OECD classifications.
Figure 4
(Continued )
530
Tornier et al.

=== Page 548 ===
Hydroxycitronellal was the one single PVS compound with an opposite classification
using our two protocols: in the in vitro patch test, it was found nonirritant, like in the European
and OECD classifications, while it was classified as irritant with the SkinEthicTM direct topical
application test, similar to EpiDermTM and EpiskinTM classifications. Moreover, 4-amino-1,2,4-
triazole (nonirritant in two experiments and irritant in the two others, with the topical
application test) was classified unambiguously as nonirritant by the in vitro patch test.
A comparison between the EU classification, the human in vivo patch test, our in vitro
patch test, and our in vitro direct topical application test is in Table 3. Among these 30 HPT
chemicals, only 17 compounds were classified identically in the Draize test (EU classification)
and in the human in vivo patch test (15). Among these 17 chemicals, 12 were also classified
similarly with the in vitro direct topical application test; 13 were also classified similarly with
the in vitro patch test; 10 of them are shared in common with the 12 cited above: isopropyl
palmitate, octanoic acid, decanoic acid, benzalkonium chloride (10%), polyethylene glycol 400,
heptanoic acid, dodecanol, tween 80, benzalkonium chloride (7.5%), and propylene glycol.
Among the seven other chemicals (of the 17), methyl caproate and benzyl alcohol were found
irritant with both in vitro protocols, while they were classified as nonirritant by the EU and
OECD classifications. For the five remaining compounds, the in vitro direct topical application
test led to the most severe classification, while 20% N,N-dimethyl-N-dodecyl aminobetaine
was classified ambiguously, and 2-propanol, 0.5% sodium hydroxide, triethanolamine, and
ethanol were classified as nonirritants with the in vitro patch test.
Among the 13 remaining chemicals, which were not classified similarly by the rabbit test
and the human in vivo test, 12 compounds were found irritant with the in vitro direct topical
application test. Thus, to the exception of the methyl laurate, which was classified as
nonirritant, the in vitro topical application test also led to the most severe classification for
these chemicals. In parallel, 10 of these 13 compounds were found irritant by the in vitro patch
test, methyl laurate and 10% hydrochloric acid were classified as nonirritant, and dimethyl
sulfoxide’s classification was ambiguous.
Statistical Reproducibility
When the classification of a tested compound was unclear (I/NI), the most pessimistic
prediction (irritant) was chosen, according to the principle of precaution.
Statistical analysis (including Pearson correlation and slope and variation coefficient) was
performed for the different endpoints of both the direct topical application test and the in vitro
patch test protocol. This study revealed an excellent reproducibility from one batch to another.
Details are presented in Tables 4 and 5. Upon the batches D, E, G, and H, the Pearson correlation
of MTT values of the repeated experiments was contained between 0.94 and 0.98, and the
Pearson correlation of IL-1a values of the repeated experiments varied from 0.92 to 0.99.
The Pearson correlation was also calculated for the 50 compounds tested with both
protocols. Concerning the direct topical application test, runs D and E were taken into account
for the PVS chemicals. An MTT Pearson correlation of 0.96 was obtained for this protocol, and
Table 4
Correlations between MTT-values of repeated experiments
Pearson Correlation
D
E
G
H
D
1
0.98
0.94
0.97
E
1
0.97
0.98
G
1
0.98
H
1
Table 5
Correlations between IL-1a-values of repeated experiments
Pearson Correlation
D
E
G
H
D
1
0.92
0.92
0.94
E
1
0.92
0.93
G
1
0.99
H
1
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
531

=== Page 549 ===
the value was of 0.97 for the in vitro patch test protocol. The corresponding measures of
variation (mean standard deviation) are 5.2% and 2.7%, respectively. In parallel, the IL-1a
Pearson correlation for the 50 chemicals was evaluated as 0.75 and 0.65, respectively.
Moreover, the mean standard deviation for IL-1a release corresponds to 4.3% of the mean
nonanoic acid–treated positive control for the direct topical application test. For the in vitro
patch test, the mean standard deviation value for IL-1a release is 15.6%.
The predictive capacity of both protocols for the testing of the 50 tested chemicals
obtained in our laboratory is shown on Table 6. For the in vitro patch test particularly, multiple
endpoint analysis allows an improvement of accuracy and sensitivity, but a decrease in
specificity (specificity ¼ 63.6%, sensitivity ¼ 82.1%, and accuracy ¼ 74.0%), compared with the
single endpoint approach (MTT reduction only) (specificity ¼ 72.7%, sensitivity ¼ 55.6%, and
accuracy ¼ 64.0%). For the direct topical application test, multiple endpoint analysis allows an
improvement of specificity, but a decrease in accuracy and sensitivity (specificity ¼ 40.9%,
sensitivity ¼ 89.3%, and accuracy ¼ 68.0%), compared with the single endpoint approach
(MTT reduction only) (specificity ¼ 50.0%, sensitivity ¼ 82.2%, and accuracy ¼ 68.0%).
VALIDITY OF THE EPIDERMIS MODEL TO PREDICT SKIN IRRITATION
IN HUMANS
A multiple endpoint analysis, including percentage of cell viability (MTT reduction), histology,
and IL-1a release, has been elaborated in an attempt to ensure the relevance and improve the
quality of the test results. Among the families of compounds described above, the chemicals of
the first family mimic the negative controls, and on the opposite, the chemicals of the fifth react
like the positive controls. The classification of these chemicals as nonirritant or irritant,
respectively, is therefore unambiguous since all three endpoints lead to the same conclusion. If
all compounds reacted similarly, one single endpoint would have been enough to classify
chemicals. However, a multiple endpoint analysis is not only a reassuring method, which
permits multiple information, but it also reveals its usefulness for the chemicals of families
two, three, and four. The second comprises chemicals, which allow high epidermal cell
viability, a normal histology, but provoke an increase of IL-1a release. According to our
prediction model, chemicals belonging to this second family are classified as nonirritants.
However, the increase of epidermal IL-1a release could be an early sign of skin irritation. These
compounds may be irritant over a prolonged or repeated application, or on weakened
epidermis.
The chemicals of the third family provoke tissue necrosis, a higher amount of released IL-
1a compared with H2O-treated negative control; however, cell viability remains higher than
50%. This class contains, therefore, irritants. MTT reduction is an efficient cell viability test
when the whole tissue is necrosed. Then, no or little mitochondrial activity is observed leading
to a strong decrease of the amount of formazan blue crystals in comparison to the negative
controls. However, when suprabasal cell layers are necrosed while the basal cell layer remains
viable, a normal MTT reduction takes place, resulting in a percentage of cell viability
comparable with negative controls (37). Moreover, some other false test results can be due to
interactions between MTT and chemicals. This was the case for eugenol in the four repeated
experiments on (living) cultures using the direct topical application protocol, the MTT values
were contained between 66.5% and 75.9% of the H2O-treated control, while histology showed
necrosis, and the level of released IL-1a was high ( 143.9 pg/mL). This elevated MTT value
was due to the interaction between eugenol and the MTT solution, since the application of
eugenol on killed cultures induces an OD value, which is 82.8% compared with the viable
Table 6
Summary of the results applied to both protocols for
the 50 tested chemicals
Dir. Top. Appl. Test
In vitro Patch Test
% Specificity
40.9
63.6
% Sensitivity
89.3
82.1
% Accuracy
68.0
74.0
532
Tornier et al.

=== Page 550 ===
untreated control tissue. On the opposite, we observed that the MTT values from eugenol-
treated cultures in the patch test protocol are contained between 12.0% and 17.5% of the H2O-
treated control. This could seem paradoxal, but it is necessary to remember that a smaller
quantity of compound is applied in this protocol and, moreover, that the patch partially
absorbs the compound. In the case of eugenol, in patch testing, our hypothesis is that a four-
hour incubation is sufficient to allow complete necrosis of the tissues and increased IL-1a
release, but it did not allow eugenol to reach the MTT solution and interact with it. On the
contrary, 5% potassium hydroxide did not provoke any interaction with the MTT, nor on living
tissues nor on frozen-killed controls, although its direct contact with MTT solution provokes an
OD value of 1.6. Concerning heptanal, the third and last compound, which showed interaction
with MTT, MTT values of 35% of the H2O-treated control were observed during the
experiments on living tissues. This is completely comparable to the results obtained on frozen-
killed controls. Although it is cautious to proceed to additional controls such as MTT
interaction with chemicals, multiple endpoint analysis also allows detection of false viability
measurements. Moreover, the classification according to our prediction model is not modified,
even when the interaction with MTT is significant. In particular, it allowed to classify eugenol
as irritant (with the direct topical application test protocol), while it would have been
impossible to conclude with a single MTT endpoint approach.
The fourth family includes chemicals, which induced low cell viability and tissue
necrosis, but did not provoke any significant increase of the IL-1a release. Therefore, most of
the compounds of this class are highly irritant or corrosive. The small amount of released IL-1a
could be due to the fast and massive destruction of the tissues, which did not have time to
release cytokines. Another explanation could be the direct destruction of the cytokines by the
chemical. Most of these compounds belong to the strong acid/base family. The epidermal
tissues are severely damaged, and necrosis is provoked by these compounds. They can thus
penetrate the epidermal tissue more easily and dissolve in the defined nutrient medium. This
passive diffusion of the compound through the tissue to the medium was visually detected by
the modification of the color of the medium.
Furthermore, some differences are observed between test results of the two in vitro
protocols described. First, MTT values are in most cases higher with the patch test protocol.
Accordingly, histology sections present a less severe necrosis. One possible reason for this is
the reduced amount of chemical applied in the patch test in comparison with the direct topical
test. A double quantity per centimeter square is applied on the tissues in this latter test. The
quantity applied in the direct topical application test has been chosen to mimic published in
vitro test protocols (25) and for its capability to cover uniformly the whole surface of the
epidermis, whatever the texture of the compound to be tested. In the in vitro patch test, the
quantity of chemical applied was defined proportionally to the human patch test described by
Basketter et al. (14). Moreover, the structure of the Hill Top chamber itself is responsible for a
partial absorption of some chemicals, reducing even more the amount of chemical that is in
contact with the epidermis. It seems that the tissues necrosed more slowly in the case of irritant
chemicals than in the direct topical application test. False negatives may result from these two
parameters in the patch test protocol. In particular, in the case of the compounds of the sixth
class, the increased MTT values may represent overestimations since high percentages of cell
viability are observed, although the histology sections show necrosis.
However, although the chemical’s effects seem to be less severe with the patch test
protocol, the application of an empty patch alone is responsible for a four- to fivefold increase
of the basal level of IL-1a release. This increase is probably due to the ratio of tissue surface to
medium volume that was double for 0.63 cm2 tissues compared with the 4 cm2 tissues. Also,
the topical application of an empty patch as well as some occlusive effects due to the patch
induce a slight increase of basal IL-1a secretion.
The principal interest of in vitro experiments is not only to obtain reproducible data
using more convenient and more ethical test protocols but also to produce useful indications
on the human skin irritation potential of raw materials and finished products. The result of the
comparison between in vitro and in vivo data is heterogeneous (Tables 2 and 3). Several
chemicals were classified differently. On one hand, there are the compounds for which all in
vitro and in vivo data corroborate, and, on the other hand, the chemicals for which in vitro
classifications are in conflict with those obtained in vivo; or even more, chemicals for which in
vivo rabbit data are in opposition to human in vivo data. Concerning the PVS chemicals, we
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
533

=== Page 551 ===
observed that our results resembled the results of those performed with other epidermal
models in most cases. Notably, dimethyl disulfide, cis-cyclooctene, 2-methyl-4-phenyl-2-
butanol, and 2,4-xylidine were classified irritant in vitro and nonirritant by the rabbit test.
Lilestralis has been classified nonirritant with our two in vitro test protocols, although the EU
and the OECD data filed it as an irritant. However, the documentation available from its
suppliers does not mention any irritant properties for this compound, but only sensitizing
effects. All results shown here are relative to the sample of chemicals obtained. Therefore, the
comparisons made with in vivo and in vitro test results are only indicative, as other batches of
chemicals were tested. Moreover, methyl palmitate, which was tested both on rabbits (25) and
humans (14), is classified as irritant and nonirritant, respectively. All in vitro tests, like the in
vivo patch test, classified this compound as nonirritant. Interspecies differences could be the
explanation.
In vitro reconstructed human epidermal tissues mimic the biophysical properties of in
vivo human epidermis. However, the reconstructed epidermis seems more sensitive to some
families of compounds. Although 17 days of airlifted tissue cultures feature a fully
differentiated stratum corneum (34,38), and a normal lipid composition (39), their barrier
function seems to be less efficient (40,41) compared with adult skin samples, leading to a
higher sensitivity to chemicals. This higher relative permeability may correspond to the
epidermis of a newly (17 days) re-epidermized wound. This increased sensibility is considered
as an advantage by Jones et al. (42) and Garcia et al. (41). Thus, when no toxicity is observed for
a compound tested on reconstituted epidermis in vitro, the toxicologist can be confident about
its safety regarding human use. Reconstituted epidermis could therefore be used according to
the principle of precaution. Furthermore, in vitro tests using reconstructed epidermis present
reproducible results leading to an unambiguous classification for almost all the tested
chemicals.
Although the identification of the chemical’s potential hazard is of the highest
importance for both industries and consumers, its classification is difficult. Human data are
certainly the most informative, but they are available for only few chemicals, and it is
dependent on the protocol used, the age (20), the anatomical site (21), and the seasonal
variability (18,22,23). On the contrary, animal data are more easily available, but the protocol
used, the organism, and even the laboratory may provide different results as shown by Weil
and Scala (8). Today, the relevance of the animal tests to assess human potential hazard is
discussed, and the lack of reproducibility makes them even more questionable.
We cannot assure that our current protocols using three-dimensional reconstituted
human epidermis is perfect to predict human skin irritation, but in addition to the classical
advantages of in vitro methods, such as a great convenience and reduced costs, reproducibility
is strongly increased compared with other methods. This reproducibility is not only seen for a
given product on repeated experiments, but by individual endpoint measured for each tested
compound. In our experiments using the PVS chemicals with the direct topical application
protocol, the Pearson correlation is contained between 0.94 and 0.98. The MTT values show
that they are almost always of the same magnitude, not just under or over 50% of viability. In
the same way, we could make very similar histological observations for a chosen chemical. The
statistical comparison of the IL-1a results shows that even if the amount of released IL-1a is not
always of the same range for the irritant compounds (Pearson correlation for 50 compounds of
0.75 for the direct topical application test and of 0.65 for the in vitro patch test), chemicals can
be classified in two classes. One contains the compounds, which always present an amount
comparable to that of the negative control, and the other exhibits a significant increase of the
amount of IL-1a, compared with the negative control. Such a reproducibility has never been
shown with the Draize test or human patch test. Because of this strong reproducibility, the
human in vitro epidermis already represents the tool of choice for screening compounds for
their skin irritation potential.
Interestingly, note that the results obtained in our laboratory with the in vitro patch test
protocol met the specificity, sensitivity, and overall accuracy performance criteria (> 60%)
defined for the ECVAM pre-validation study described by Fentem et al. (25) (Table 6).
Moreover, a recent study performed by Kanda´rova´ et al. (43) revealed that dimethyl disulfide
had been improperly tested in vivo. Consequently, the real classification of this compound is
unknown. In parallel, methyl palmitate presents an ambiguous in vivo classification according
to the literature (Table 1). If we remove these two chemicals, specificity obtained with the in
534
Tornier et al.

=== Page 552 ===
vitro patch test increases to 71.4%, sensitivity to 85.2%, and accuracy to 79.2%. Consequently,
our in vitro patch test should be accepted for formal pre-validation by ECVAM.
However, all these test results are relative to the samples and lot numbers of the tested
compound. We observed important variability in test results when certain compounds
(lilestralis, hydroxycitronellal) came from different suppliers (unpublished data). For official
validation studies, great care should be taken to control the quality of the reference compounds
tested. Transferability being one of the parameters for ECVAM validation, it is indisputable
that our encouraging intra-laboratory results should be followed by an inter-laboratory study.
On the opposite, performance of the direct topical application protocol was disappointing
compared with the in vitro patch test protocol and other published data. Taken together, this
data set provides a platform for further mechanistic and validation studies. We do not wish to
overgeneralize these data; judgment will continue to be required when extrapolating such
information for new chemicals in terms of their complex uses in biology. Moreover,
SkinEthicTM epidermis is also involved in the current ECVAM skin irritation validation
studies using the 15-minute direct application time followed by a washing step and a 42-hour
incubation (44).
REFERENCES
1. Draize JH, Woodard G, Calvery HO, Methods for the study of irritation and toxicity of substances
applied topically to the skin and mucous membranes. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1944; 82:377–390.
2. Phillips L II, Steinberg M, Maibach HI, et al. A comparison of rabbit and human skin response to
certain irritants. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1972; 21:369–382.
3. Marzulli FN, Maibach HI. The rabbit as a model for evaluating skin irritants: a comparison of results
obtained on animals and man using repeated skin exposures. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1975; 13:533–540.
4. Nixon GA, Tyson CA, Wertz WC. Interspecies comparisons of skin irritancy. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
1975; 31:481–790.
5. Scott RC, Corrigan MA, Smith F, et al. The influence of skin structure on permeability: an intersite and
interspecies comparison with hydrophilic penetrants. J Investig Dermatol 1991; 96:921–925.
6. Campbell RL, Bruce RD. Direct comparison of rabbit and human primary skin irritation responses to
isopropylmyristate. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1981; 59:555–563.
7. ECETOC. ECETOC Monograph 32: Use of human data in hazard classification for irritation and
sensitization, Brussels. 2002.
8. Weil CS, Scala RA. Study of intra- and interlaboratory variability in the results of rabbit eye and skin
irritation tests. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1971; 19:276–360.
9. Spielmann H. Aternativen in der Toxikologie. In: Gruber FP, Spielmann H, eds. Alternativen zu
Tierexperimenten. Berlin-Heidelberg-Oxford: Spektrum Akadamisher Verlag, 1996:108–126.
10. Finkelstein P, Laden K, Miechowski W. Laboratory methods for evaluating skin irritancy. Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol 1965; 7:74–78.
11. Smiles KA, Pollack ME. A quantitative human patch testing procedure for low level skin irritants. J
Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:755–764.
12. Pie´rard GE, Arrese JE, Rodriguez C, et al. Effects of softened and unsoftened fabrics on sensitive skin.
Contact Dermatitis 1994; 30:286–291.
13. Effendy I, Maibach HI. Surfactants and experimental irritant contact dermatitis. Contact Dermaitis
1995; 33:217–225.
14. Basketter D, Chamberlain M, Griffiths HA, et al. The classification of skin irritants by human patch
test. Food Chem Toxicol 1997; 35:845–852.
15. Basketter D, Kimber I, Willis C, et al. Contact irritation models. Toxicology of contact dermatitis:
allergy, irritancy and urticaria. In: Current Toxicology Series. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1999:
39–56.
16. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Dermatotoxicology. 6th ed. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 2004.
17. York M, Basketter DA, Neilson L. Skin irritation testing in man for hazard assessment—evaluation of
four patch systems. Hum Exp Toxicol 1995; 14:729–734.
18. Basketter D, Griffiths HA, Wang XM, et al. Individual, ethnic and seasonal variability in irritant
susceptibility of skin: the implications for a predictive human patch test. Contact Dermaitis 1996;
35:208–213.
19. Foy V, Weinkauf R, Whittle E, et al. Ethnic variation in the skin irritation response. Contact Dermaitis
2001; 45:346–349.
20. Robinson MK. Population differences in acute skin irritation responses. Contact Dermaitis 2002;
46:86–93.
In Vitro Skin Irritation Testing
535

=== Page 553 ===
21. Lee CH, Maibach HI. The sodium lauryl sulphate model: an overview. Contact Dermitis 1995; 33:1–7.
22. Robinson MK, Perkins MA, Basketter DA. Application of a 4-h human patch test method for
comparative and investigative assessment of skin irritation. Contact Dermaitis 1998; 38:194–202.
23. Geier J, Uter, W, Pirker C, et al. Patch testing with the irritant sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS) is useful
in interpreting weak reactions to contact allergens as allergenic or irritant. Contact Dermitis 2003;
48:99–107.
24. Heylings JR, Diot S, Esdaile DJ, et al. A prevalidation study of the in vitro skin irritation function test
(SIFT) for prediction of acute skin irritation in vivo: results and evaluation of ECVAM Phase III.
Toxicol In Vitro 2003; 17:12–138.
25. Fentem JH, Briggs D, Chesne´ C, et al. A prevalidation study on in vitro tests for acute skin irriation:
results and evaluation by the management team. Toxicol In Vitro 2001; 15:57–93.
26. Rougier A, Goldberg AM, Maibach HI. In Vitro Skin Toxicology: Irritation, Phototoxicity,
Sensitization. New York: Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., Publishers, 1994.
27. Rosdy M, Bertino B, Butet V, et al. Retinoic acid inhibits epidermal differentiation when applied
topically on the stratum corneum of epidermis formed in vitro by human keratinocytes grown on
defined medium. In Vitro Toxicol 1997; 10:39–47.
28. De Brugerolle de Fraissinette A, Picarles V, Chibout S, et al. Predictivity of an in vitro model for acute
and chronic skin irritation (SkinEthic) applied to the testing of topical vehicles. Cell Biol Toxicol 1999;
15:121–135.
29. Chew A-L, Maibach HI. In vitro methods to predict skin irritation. In: Shayne Cox Gad, ed. In Vitro
Toxicology. 2nd ed. New York: Taylor & Francis, 2000:49–61.
30. Faller C, Bracher M, Dami N, et al. Predictive ability of reconstructed human epidermis equivalents
for the assessment of skin irritation of cosmetics. Toxicol In Vitro 2002; 16:557–572.
31. Doucet O, Robert C, Zastrow L. Use of a serum-free reconstituted epidermis as a skin pharmaco-
logical model. Toxicol In Vitro 1996; 10:305–313.
32. Coquette A, Berna N, Vandenbosch A, et al. Analysis of interleukin-1a (IL-1a) and interleukin-8 (IL-8)
expression and release in in vitro reconstructed human epidermis or the prediction of in vivo skin
irritation and/or sensitization. Toxicol In Vitro 2003; 17:311–321.
33. Wells T, Schro¨der K-R. Skin irritation—evaluation of mechanisms: description of an IL-1a threshold.
Toxicol Lett 2003(suppl. 1):S43, S144.
34. Rosdy M, Clauss L-C. Terminal epidermal differentiation of human keratinocytes grown in
chemically defined medium on inert filter substrates at the air-liquid interface. J Investig Dermatol
1990; 95:409–414.
35. Wahlberg JE, Maibach HI. Nonanoic acid irritation—a positive control at routine patch testing.
Contact Dermat 1980; 6:128–130.
36. Mosmann T. Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: application to proliferation
and cytotoxicity assays. J Immunol Methods 1983; 65:55–63.
37. Meloni M, Dalla Valle P, Cappadoro M, et al. The importance of Multiple Endpoint Analysis (MEA)
using reconstituted human tissue models for irritation and biocompatibility testing. INVITOX abstract
book, 2002:P4–P07.
38. Fartasch M, Rosdy M. Maturation of the epidermal barrier in air-exposed keratinocyte cultures: a time
course study. J Investig Dermatol 1996; 107:518.
39. Ramdin LPS, Richardson J, Harding CR, et al. The effect of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) on the ceramide
subspecies profile in the SkinEthic epidermal model. Stratum Corneum Meeting, Basel, Switzerland,
2001.
40. Gysler A, Ko¨nigsmann U, Scha¨fer-Korting M. Tridimensional skin models recording percutaneous
absorption. ALTEX 1999; 16(2):67–72.
41. Garcia N, Doucet O, Bayer M, et al. Use of reconstituted human epidermis cultures to assess the
disrupting effect of organic solvents on the barrier function of excised human skin. In Vitr Mol Toxicol
2000; 13:159–171.
42. Jones PA, King AV, Earl LK, et al. An assessment of the phototoxic hazard of a personal product
ingredient using in vitro assays. Toxicol In Vitro 2003; 17:471–480.
43. Kanda´rova´ H, Liebsch M, Genschow E, et al. Optimisation of the EpiDerm test protocol for the
upcoming ECVAM validation study on in vitro skin irritation tests. ALTEX 2004; 21:107–114.
44. Kanda´rova´ H, Liebsch M, Schmidt E, et al. Assessment of the skin irritation potential of chemicals by
using the SkinEthic reconstructed human epidermal model and the common skin irritation protocol
evaluated in the ECVAM skin irritation validation study. ATLA 2006; 34:393–406.
536
Tornier et al.

=== Page 554 ===
51
Reconstructed Corneal and Skin Models
Klaus R. Schro¨der
Henkel AG & Co. KgaA, Du¨sseldorf, Germany
INTRODUCTION
During the last decade tissue engineering became a progressing field in biotechnological
research. The vision of medical treatment of burnt patients, the treatment of ulcera, and the
idea of reconstructing damaged organs revealed very rapidly further possibilities. Tissues
resembled not only morphologically the situation in vivo but also revealed comparable
physiology. This made artificial tissues interesting for testing efficacy of pharmaceutical and
cosmetics products. The development of the tissue models was paralleled by an increasing
demand in using alternative methods for the identification of toxicological hazards inherent to
raw material with the vision to replace animal testing for human safety assessment in toto.
Increasing efforts were made to validate such alternatives against the existing animal
tests. Some of those are already successful, others, though promising, need further refinement.
Since the major field of applications for the cosmetic industry is doubtlessly the surface
epithelial lining of humans, i.e., the skin and the mucous membranes of mouth and eye,
progress in reconstructing such models is followed thoroughly and applications for these
alternatives are evaluated extensively.
This chapter deals with the comparability of the reconstructed human corneal and skin
models with the in vivo situation and shows up some areas of application in cosmetic science.
RECONSTRUCTED CORNEAL MODELS
Corneal Tissues
The epithelium of the eye surface distinguishes three regions: centrally the cornea, the limbus
as transitional zone, and the peripheral conjunctiva. As a mucous membrane, it is a squamous
epithelium, not keratinized but stratified. In contrast to the conjunctiva, the central cornea and
the limbus are devoid of other cells such as Langerhans cells, melanocytes, and endothelial
capillary cells.
The cornea itself is formed by three layers: an epithelium, a stroma, and an endothelial
lining.
The epithelium consists of four to five cell layers with changing morphology. The cells of
the basal layer are polygonal in shape. While proliferating, they produce lateral extensions to
form so called wing cells. Apically they become flattened and compose a superficial cell lining.
The outermost cells are strongly interlocked, building tight junctions to form a non-keratinized
barrier. All cells contain a nucleus.
The stroma below the basal cells constitutes the majority of the corneal thickness. Directly
below the basal cells of the epithelium, there is an acellular region called the Bowman’s membrane,
going over into the stroma. The stroma itself is a highly organized tissue made up by paralleled
lamellae of collagen fibrils. Elongated fibroblast-like keratocytes are found throughout the
stroma, running in parallel to the collagen lamellae. Posterior, a single layer of endothelial cells
lines the stroma separated from it by the Descemet’s membrane, a true basement membrane.
Damage to the Cornea
Irritation of the eye is a local and reversible response to external stimuli. Corneal and
conjunctival cells are involved in this response. When evaluating damaging effects in animal
testing like the rabbit Draize test, the majority derives from damage to the cornea (1). Studies
on pathological changes after application of surfactants in standard animal irritation assays
revealed that at early timepoints of three hours and one day after application, the potency of

=== Page 555 ===
the compounds could be differentiated. Innocuous and slight irritants affected superficial cells,
mild to moderate compounds affected the epithelium and the superficial stroma, whereas
severely irritating substances deteriorated deep stroma down to the endothelium (2).
Studies using non-surfactant compounds widened the insight into irritation, indicating
that compounds may differentially injure cornea and conjunctivae. Furthermore, timepoints of
evaluation played a critical role since damage at three hours could not predict severity of
damage at one hour. Examples were given that, though in many cases damage by compounds
is a progressive event first affecting the epithelium, some compounds have stronger effects on
the stroma without involving the epithelium.
Thus, aspects of penetration, cytotoxicity, as well as time-related effects have to be
considered when addressing hazard assessment by alternative methods. Therefore, as injury is
a three-dimensional process, alternatives should focus on three-dimensional models.
Reconstructed Cornea Models
Corneal tissues produced by methods of tissue engineering resemble the in vivo situation more
and more with respect to morphology, physiology, and biochemistry.
Tissue constructs exist on the basis of cells of different animal origin, i.e., human, rabbit,
or bovine. They differ in their complexity. While some models are simply made up by
epithelial cells (3), others comprise an outer epithelium grown on a stromal equivalent (4). The
most complex equivalents even contain a posterior endothelial lining (5,6).
In all these models, the in vivo situation is closely mimicked. Depending on the origin of
corneal cells, the epithelium is composed by 5 to 6 or 9 to 10 cell layers. Basal cells and wing
cells might not be differentiated as clearly as in vivo, but stratification is obvious from flattened
superficial cells being tightly packed and interlocked and joint by tight junctions forming
a barrier. Slight differences in the morphology of this superficial cell lining are discussed to
be due to the absence of lacrimal fluid and eyelid blinking (6). Basal layers express
hemidesmosomes. Their internal placodes are connected to the cytoskeleton (3).
A functional expression of extracellular matrix plays an important role in the integrity and
function of a tissue. A major component in the basement membrane, i.e., laminin, is detectable in
the basal layers of the reconstructed skin model. In vivo fibronectin is localized in the basement
membrane and promotes corneal migration and re-epithelialisation. In the reconstructed cornea
models it is mostly detected at the epithelial-stromal junction as well as the collagen matrix making
up the stromal equivalent (4,6). Integrins are expressed differentially throughout the epithelium
according to their location of action. Their expression resembles the situation in vivo (4).
Permeation studies with pharmacologically active compounds underline the close
resemblance and functionality of the described models. Permeation coefficients evaluated by
penetration studies with organotypic cornea models differed form the in vivo situation in
factors only smaller than two indicating the functionality of the epithelial barrier (6).
Use of Reconstructed Corneal Epithelia in Safety Assessment
For the prediction of irritating effects, mainly reconstructed epithelial models are used. In
contrast to the more complex models, these are commercially available. The use comprises
testing of pure compounds as well as formulations.
The main endpoint evaluated in such prediction models is cytotoxicity based on the
conversion of MTT in the vital layers of the cornea (7,8). After application of cosmetic
formulations for different time durations to the corneal equivalents, ET50 values are calculated
estimating a time at which 50% of the tissues are mortal. On the basis of internal benchmarks,
such models are used internally for product development (7). In a study with 68 tested products,
irritant effects were overestimated by 10% compared with modified maximum average scores
(MMAS) data, while there was only an underestimation of 1.5% (8). Therefore, it can be argued
that they have a predictive ability to identify nonirritants from irritant products.
Testing pure compounds showed that prediction models from formulation testing with
cytotoxicity as the only endpoint could not be transferred as such (8). Cytotoxicity testing
focuses on the conversion of MTT in the viable layers of the equivalent not picking necrotic
effects in the suprabasal layers. Additional parameters for evaluation of toxicity such as of
histological parameters should be taken into account as well. A pre-validation study analyzing
the viability of corneal tissues by the ability to reduce MTT after treatment with 20 pure
chemicals, irritants and nonirritants, revealed an overall concordance of 80%. While all irritants
538
Schro¨der

=== Page 556 ===
were predicted correctly (sensitivity ¼ 100%), the prediction model produced a number of
false positives (specificity ¼ 56%) (9). Officially validated prediction models by European
Center for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM) based on human reconstructed
cornea do not exist yet.
Further endpoints such as release of cytokines and chemokines often used in other
epithelial models are not subject to prediction models for eye irritation, though they are released
after damage of the cornea (10), are detected in tears (11,12), and play a vital role in its
regeneration (13). Studies have shown that cytokines can be produced after stimulation of corneal
epithelial rat cell lines (14) and immortalized human cell lines (15). The evaluation of these
parameters together with the already established multi-endpoint analyses might give us the
chance to have a validated and internationally accepted alternative method to the Draize test.
RECONSTRUCTED SKIN EQUIVALENTS
Skin Equivalents
It has been 20 years since epidermal equivalents have been produced successfully for clinical
applications (16). Since this time several equivalents of different complexity have been
produced for scientific investigations as well as for commercial use. Today the most common
equivalents are made up of keratinocytes. Biopsies from clinical surgery of adults and foreskin
of young boys are sources of keratinocytes. In the simplest models, these cells are grown in
culture under submerged condition for approximately 14 days until a multilayered tissue
equivalent is formed. This equivalent is lifted to the so-called air-liquid interface in culture
dishes to become stratified and cornified. Thus, such models distinguish several layers
resembling in morphological characteristics to native skin: a stratum basale, a stratum
spinosum, a stratum granulosum, and a stratum corneum.
Epidermal equivalents consist of 5 to 14 layers of viable cells depending on the model.
Their thickness varies between 23 and 100 mm. Overall, they do not seem to be as thick as
native skin with 80 to 90 mm.
The cells of the stratum corneum are of columnar to round shape. In contrast to native skin,
they regularly contain intracellular lipid droplets. Keratinocytes of this layer are involved in the
formation of the basement membrane. A lamina densa and a lamina lucida are produced by all
equivalents in a patchy instead of continuous manner. Hemidesmosomes as anchoring structures
between cells and basement membrane indicate the functionality of the stratum basale.
The stratum spinosum is characterized in the upper layers in vivo as in vitro by flattened
cells. Unlike in native skin, few intracellular lipid droplets are recognized in cells of this layer.
The stratum granulosum produces numerous lamellar bodies of normal appearance thus
correlating with the in vivo situation. Depending on the skin equivalent, they are more or less
rapidly extruded at the interface to the stratum corneum. The unique organization of the alternating
electron-dense and electron-lucent lipid lamellar sheets in the intercellular space between the
corneocytes indicates a physiological processing of extracellular lipids of the stratum corneum.
The stratum corneum is made up of 14 to 25 cell layers compared with 15 to 20 in native
skin. Its thickness ranges from 12 to 37 mm instead of 10 to 12 mm. In equivalents used for
penetration studies, this number increases to 100 mm due to 100 layers of cells.
A detailed comparison of the characteristics of the different epidermal equivalents is
given by Ponec et al. (17).
In concordance with the morphological resemblance of the reconstructed skin
equivalents to native skin, expression and localization of differentiation markers correlate to
the in vivo situation. Keratin 1 and 10 as indicators for early differentiation are present in all
suprabasal layers of nearly all skin equivalents. The same holds true for loricrin and SPRR2,
markers only present in the stratum granulosum. The localization of other differentiation
markers like involucrin and transglutaminase does not resemble native skin as they are not
restricted only to the stratum granulosum and found in all suprabasal layers. SKALP and
SPRR3 are expressed in some epidermal tissue equivalents though absent in vivo.
Studies on comparative gene expression uncovered similarities between equivalents and
native skin and showed up differences to monolayer cultures.
Monolayer cultures lack differentiation markers expressed in the upper layers of the
epidermis, such as filaggrin, loricrin, involucrin, and keratins K1 and K10. Furthermore they
Reconstructed Corneal and Skin Models
539

=== Page 557 ===
overexpress actin-associated cytoskeletal proteins and different integrins, reflecting their
motility and adherence to the culture dishes, respectively. Proteins related to cell cycle and
DNA replication are expressed in cultured keratinocyte monolayers while repressed in native
skin. Together with a high expression of nucleoskeletal proteins, they reflect requirements in
rapidly proliferating cells. The expression of corresponding genes identifies skin equivalents as
metabolic active tissues somewhere in between monolayer cultures and native skin.
Similarities to native skin are found in the expression of cell-to-cell signalling molecules,
as secreted proteins and cell surface receptors. This difference to monolayer cultures might
indicate that cell-cell communication is important in the organization and maintenance of a
stratified epidermis (18).
Recently, Poumay et al. (19) published a protocol that allows any experienced laboratory
to produce its own epidermal equivalent. According to the protocol, one obtains a fully
stratified epidermis within 14 days that reveals all the characteristic markers of differentiation
(keratins 14 and 10, involucrin, and filaggrin).
Full-thickness skin models are of a higher complexity. They comprise a dermal and an
epidermal compartment. Fibroblasts have to be cultivated in a dermal compartment and have
to be given enough time to populate the space before keratinocytes can be seeded on top.
Fibroblasts need a matrix that offers an environment facilitating the cells to exert their
physiological characteristics. The use of collagen without any further treatment for its use as a
dermal equivalent bears problems. The physiological characteristic of fibroblasts to exert
traction forces leads to a contraction of the gel. Thus a matrix is required to be rigid enough to
resist the contraction forces of the fibroblast while offering them the right physiological
environment. Fibroblasts seeded to such a lattice produce their own extracellular material:
collagen, elastin, fibrillin, fibronectin, and fibulin to mention a few. They organize the
orientation of the fibers in the extracellular matrix as to be found in vivo. Short fibers are in
close vicinity to the dermo-epidermal junction (DEJ) oriented perpendicularly, and long fibers
oriented along with the DEJ in deeper parts of the dermis. This organization corresponds to the
situation in vivo where similar differences can be seen between the papillary dermis and the
reticular dermis. A proper DEJ is formed between the fibroblasts and the keratinocytes
comprising the epidermis. Typical markers are expressed like laminin and collagen IV and VII.
The basal layers of the epidermis express strong integrins, while in the suprabasal layers, one
can find the differentiation markers transglutaminase and different cytokeratins (20).
Barrier Function and Penetration
One of the major functions of the human skin is the protection of the body against the loss
of water. This function is fulfilled by a barrier in the upper layers of the stratum corneum being
produced during the process of keratinization. In epidermal equivalents, this terminal
differentiation is induced by culturing tissue equivalents at the air-liquid interface. Its
development can be followed by the cutaneous permeability of caffeine in epidermal equivalents,
which decreases with time at the air-liquid interface, finally reaching a plateau. After approxi-
mately 16 days in culture, no further improvement of the penetration characteristics can be
observed (21).
The barrier is made up of three major components: the multiple lipid lamellae filling the
extracellular space between the corneocytes, an impermeable cornified envelope made of
proteins produced during terminal differentiation and coating corneocytes internally, and a
corneocyte lipid envelope of o-OH-ceramides, o-OH-hydroxy acids, and free fatty acids situated
externally to the cornified envelope. A proper composition and a structural organization of the
lipids in the stratum corneum are required for a functional barrier (17,22). Though skin
equivalents contain all major lipid classes, differences are noticed in content and profile either
between the models or in native skin. None of the models resembled native skin in terms of
lipid composition and ceramide profiling. With respect to ceramides, content of ceramide 2 is
much higher in the epidermal equivalents, while polar ceramides are underrepresented or
even missing.
Penetration studies with compounds of different lipophilicity revealed great differences
with respect to flux across the membranes between excised human skin and epidermal
equivalents. Permeability toward hydrophilic compounds as salicylic acid and caffeine
showed increased fluxes by a factor of 20. Mannitol, another hydrophilic compound revealed
an increased flux by factors of 20 to 50 depending on the equivalents tested (23). Hydrophobic
540
Schro¨der

=== Page 558 ===
substances penetrated skin equivalents 900-fold faster. Reproducibility of penetration between
different batches is regarded as an indicator for reproducible barrier function in skin
equivalents (21,24). Depending on the compounds tested, one can conclude that reproduci-
bility between batches is dependent on its lipophilicity. Gysler et al. (25) reported a variability
of 14% between various batches regarding penetration of prednilosone being better than that of
native skin. Garcia (21) demonstrated satisfactory coefficient of variation (CV) at approx-
imately 20% regarding penetration of caffeine, confirming data published by Lotte et al. (24).
Reproducibility of penetration of strongly hydrophilic mannitol was poor between batches in
all the different models tested, while best for lipophilic lauric acid.
In a recent study by Scha¨fer-Korting et al. (26), different epidermal equivalents,
SkinEthic1, EpiDerm1, and EpiSkin1, have been compared with human epidermis, bovine
udder skin, and pigskin in a multicenter approach. Analytes were caffeine and testosterone. It
turned out that the human reconstructed epithelia revealed inter-laboratory and intra-laboratory
variability. In comparison with the human epidermis, the permeation of the compounds via the
reconstructed epithelia are overestimated. Obvious differences were observed between the
different equivalents. For testosterone, the model with the poorest barrier was SkinEthic, followed
by EpiDerm and EpiSkin, for caffeine barrier was best in EpiDerm.
Thus, the barrier of commercially available epidermal equivalents is still less effective
than that of native skin. This is discussed to be an intrinsic property of all epidermal
equivalents (27). The different permeation characteristics between the reconstructed tissues
indicate that though histological parameters are quite similar and resemble native skin, further
research is necessary to reach a common standard achieved by every supplier. The only model
resembling native skin in terms of composition and ceramide profile is the re-epithelialized de-
epidermized dermis by Ponec (28). With respect to penetration, this model shows best
penetration characteristic for caffeine only differing to a factor of 2 in terms of flux from native
skin (Ponec: personal communications).
Irritation Testing
The close resemblance of the epidermal equivalents to native human epidermis favors its use for
the prediction of skin irritation that is still assessed on animals. Since keratinocytes are the first
cells coming into contact with external compounds, they play an important role in the initiation
and modulation of skin irritation (29). Markers produced and released by these cells are initial
signals for visible clinical signs of irritation as edema and erythema, due to responses of the
deeper tissues in human skin.
Early effects of irritation are mostly studied with models consisting only of keratinocytes,
pure epidermis models. They are mostly commercially available: EpiDerm, EpiSkin,
Apligraf1, and SkinEthic. Further models are in-house developments (30) or used for
scientific purposes (31,32).
Recently, Poumay et al. (19) published a protocol that allows any experienced laboratory
to produce its own epidermal equivalent. According to the protocol, one obtains a fully
stratified epidermis within 14 days that reveals all the characteristic markers of differentiation
(keratins 14 and 10, involucrin, and filaggrin).
In 2007, the ECVAM validated a prediction model to predict skin irritation with human
reconstructed epidermal models. Analyzed were 58 chemicals, irritants and nonirritants. The
assessed endpoints were viability measured by the turnover of MTT and analysis of released
interleukin (IL) 1a to increase sensitivity. With the combination of the two endpoints, an
overall sensitivity of 91% and a specificity of 79% for EpiSkin were achieved. It is regarded as a
full replacement of the rabbit skin irritation test. For EpiDerm, a sensitivity of 57% and a
specificity of 85% were obtained; analyzing IL 1a did not result in an improvement of these
results. Thus, this system was recommended to be used in tiered testing strategy to assess skin
irritation but cannot be regarded as a stand-alone prediction model (33). Catch-up validations
of other commercially available systems (e.g., EST-10001, Advanced Cell Systems1, and
others) are undertaken so that several systems from different producers should be available
soon to assess skin irritation in vitro.
An OECD guideline for the prediction of skin irritation in vitro does not exist yet.
Predicting potential irritation of ingredients is only one point that interests cosmetic
industry. Another point is at least as important as the knowledge about hazardous effects in
the predictivity of the irritating effects of formulations.
Reconstructed Corneal and Skin Models
541

=== Page 559 ===
Measuring the turnover of MTT definitely faces the fact that the epidermal equivalents
metabolize it only in the (supra)basal layers. Toxic effects not affecting the lower parts of the
epidermal equivalent but the apical layers, as sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), therefore cannot be
predicted and evaluated (34). At least the evaluation of histological sections has to be taken
into account. Studies therefore include in addition the determination of inflammatory
mediators and enzyme release. Several studies dealt with the detection of inflammatory
mediators, as cytokines, chemokines and prostaglandins. IL 1a, constitutively expressed, is one
of the most important cytokines since it is released from keratinocytes immediately after
membrane damage. Its release resembles data obtained by Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
release. Further studies looked at IL 6. Though not released by pure epidermal equivalents, it is
produced after irritation to model consisting of an additional dermal part (reviewed in 35).
IL 8 has strong chemotactic effects. It is induced by IL 1a and produced by keratinocytes
and fibroblasts, therefore transducing effects to deeper parts of the skin. Prostaglandine E3
(PGE3) is the best investigated prostaglandin with respect to application of irritants to skin
equivalents. Though some models produce PGE3 in a dose-dependent manner (32), other
models fail to show such a relationship (35).
Perkins et al. (36) compared data concerning vitality (MTT), the release of enzymes as
LDH and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and the release of IL 1a after treatment of skin
equivalents for definite times toward a human 14 days’ repeated patch test, assessing the
irritating potency of cosmetic formulation. The results revealed that for the prediction of
irritating effects due to cosmetic formulations, endpoints like vitality (MTT) was useful for
rank-ordering skin irritancy levels of surfactants. In addition with enzyme release (LDH and
AST), these parameters distinguished lower and higher irritancy products. IL 1a was able to
distinguish and rank-order the compounds of irritancy between these two extreme points.
Another study compared the irritation effects of 22 cosmetic formulations. Endpoints
measured in vitro were the determination of the effective time after application when 50%
of the tissues lost their viability (ET50), percent of viability left 16 hours after application, the
release of IL 1a, and the release of LDH. In vivo irritation was assessed under occlusive
conditions by the modified Frosch–Kligman soap chamber patch test, in which the test material
is applied repeatedly: the first time for 24 hours, followed by three applications of 6 hours on
each of the following three days. Skin reactions are scored on each day until day 5. In addition,
skin reddening was measured with a chromameter, and barrier interference was assessed by
transepidermal water loss (TEWL) at the beginning and at the end of the study. The best rank
correlation in the in vivo and in vitro data was achieved for ET50 followed by MTT at 16 hours
and the IL 1a release, while for LDH release correlation was generally low.
Comparing the mean total score of the in vivo evaluation at day 5 with ET50, linear
regression analysis gave coefficients of correlation of r ¼ 0.84 to r ¼ 0.94, depending on the
model. Further analysis of the data by contingency tables taking into account a visual score of 2
as a cutoff value between irritancy and nonirritancy and MTT50 values as discriminator
revealed equivalent results in all models tested: sensitivity ¼ 92%, specificity ¼ 100%, and
concordance of 95%.
Protocols for the prediction of irritating effects of formulations are generally in-house
methods. Therefore direct comparisons are hardly possible. Some of the protocols concentrate
on the scoring and grading on biochemical parameters (Chatelain, personal communication),
others use statistical methods to work out correlation between in vivo and in vitro data.
Generally one can conclude that in vitro assessment of irritation induced by formulations
can distinguish between nonirritating and irritating formulations when data are compared
with objective endpoint, clinical signs of irritation such as edema, erythema, and fissures.
Other more subjective effects like stinging, itching, and pain are hardly to be predicted with
the existing in vitro approaches.
Pharmacotoxicology
The reaction to topically applied irritants with the release and production of inflammatory
mediators indicates that epidermal equivalents resemble native skin not only in terms of
morphology but also in terms of physiology and biochemistry. Different studies deal with the
biochemical characterization and metabolic competence of these models to identify them as
alternatives for pharmacotoxicological studies. Gysler et al. (37) demonstrated the conversion
of topically applied glucocorticoids into their metabolites by the metabolism of the
542
Schro¨der

=== Page 560 ===
reconstructed skin models. The double ester prednicarbamate (PC) esterified at position 17 and
21 was hydrolyzed by esterases during its passage through the skin equivalent into the
monoester P17EC and later on after passage nonenzymatically to P21EC. No PC itself was
detected after passage, since it was totally metabolized. These results were in analogy to those
obtained from experiments with native skin.
A fluorinated monoester betamethasone-17-valerate (BM17V) was not affected by
esterases because of a missing ester bond at position 21, which passed the skin unconverted.
The only metabolites found were BM17V and the nonenzymatically converted BM21V, after
permeation of skin equivalents as well as native skin. Thus, the metabolism of PC and BM17V
was well reflected by the skin equivalents.
Another study shows the applicability for screening skin-targeted androgen modulators
since skin equivalents express type 1 5a reductase (5aR) activity. RT-PCR experiments revealed
the expression of a unique 5a R1cDNA fragment, while there were no traces of 5a R2. This
reflects the situation in native skin where 5a R1 is highly predominant and regarded as the
important enzyme for testosterone turnover.
Topically applied testosterone is metabolized during permeation by 5a reductase mainly
to dihydroxytestosterone. When inhibiting the enzyme by finasteride, this metabolic pathway
is blocked dose dependently in skin equivalents as the main metabolite 4-androstene-3,
17-dione is produced (38).
In this respect, enzymes of the xenobiotic metabolism are of comparable importance.
Activities of phase I enzyme cytochrome P 450 IA1 (CYP IA1) concerning its 7-ethoxyresorufin-
O-deethylase (EROD) and 7-ethoxycoumarin-O-deethylase (ECOD) and of phase II enzyme
glutathione S-transferase (GST) by 1,4-chlorodinitrobenzene (CDNB) conversion were
examined in several skin equivalents (39). Furthermore, NAD(P)H:quinone reductase (NQR)
activities were tested.
EROD activities were below detection levels in all tested models, but could be induced
by 3-methylcholanthrene. This induction was strongly batch dependent in all the models, since
some batches were not inducible at all. With respect to ECOD activity, there was a basal
activity in all models. ECOD activity was only inducible in those batches that were inducible
for EROD as well. Both activities could be inhibited by clotrimazole.
General GST activity against the standard substrate CDNB was detected in all
equivalents. Variation within and between batches of all models did not exceed 20%.
Activities were higher than in normal skin except for EpiSkin (40).
NQR is an enzyme that catalyzes the reduction of quinone, compounds present in the
environment naturally or anthropogenic. Activities were tested against menadione. All tested
models were competent concerning NQR, with SkinEthic showing highest and EpiDerm
showing lowest activities. Activities in EpiDerm resembled those of native skin best. Inhibition
by dicumarol could be induced in all the tested equivalents.
Studies on the gene expression of enyzmes of the xenobiotic metabolism in full-thickness
models showed great resemblence to the in vivo situation. Full-thickness models were
separated into dermis and epidermis, as well as native skin. Both compartments were analyzed
for their gene expression to show differences in the expression pattern of epidermis and
dermis and differences to the in vivo situtation. Phase I enzymes and phase II enzymes are
comparably expressed in the different compartments of the native skin. Differences could be
seen neither qualitatively nor quantitatively. Genes less strongly expressed could be induced
by b-naphthoflavone (41). A review by Gibbs et al. (42) summarizes the actual status of
xenobiotic metabolism in skin models compared with native skin.
These studies reveal the metabolic competence of skin equivalents, the physiological
regulation of gene expression, and thus their use for pharmacotoxicological studies.
Studies with Melanocytes
For examination of mechanisms of skin tanning and the identification of ingredients
influencing this process, the addition of melanocytes to epidermal equivalents is of great
advantage. Cocultures of melanocytes and keratinocytes resulted in an enhanced survival of
these cells and promoted melanin synthesis (43). Melanocytes and keratinocytes form together
a so-called epidermal melanin unit. It typically consists of one melanocyte that is in contact
with approximately 35 keratinocytes. Dendrites formed by melanocytes interdigitate into the
intercellular spaces. Melanosomes produced within these dendrites are transported into the
Reconstructed Corneal and Skin Models
543

=== Page 561 ===
keratinocytes. Here they orient themselves toward the nucleus and are organized in the form
of an apical cap protecting the nucleus against irradiation. Thus functionality of the melanin
unit can be monitored in the in vitro system. A recent study by Yoon et al. (44) shows the
applicability of these in vitro systems to screen for melanogenesis affecting compounds.
Reconstructed epidermal equivalents contained melanocytes of different origin: of African-
Americans, Asians, and Caucasians. Two compounds, melanin-stimulating hormone (MSH)
and dihydroxyphenyl alanine (DOPA), known as stimulators of melanogenesis, were
examined for their ability to induce melanin content and tyrosinase activity. MSH increased
tyrosinase activity in all three types of equivalent. This resulted in an increased content of
melanin. In histological sections, Fontana–Masson staining of the melanin revealed an
extended pigmentation in the upper layers of the skin.
DOPA increased melanin content, but decreased tyrosinase activity due to competition
with the substrate used. Effects were more obvious in models with melanocytes from African-
Americans and Asians than from Caucasians.
The key enzyme in the melanogenesis is the tyrosinase regulating the hydroxylation of
tyrosine. Therefore known inhibitors affect the activity of this enzyme. Four inhibitors
hydroquinone, arbutin, kojic acid, and niacinamid were tested. All compounds inhibited
tyrosinase more or less dose dependently in all tissues, with hydroquinone having strongest
effects. Melanin content was decreased in all tissues accordingly, whereas Fontana–Masson-
stained section revealed a decreased melanin content only in the hydroquinone- and arbutin-
treated equivalents.
Though some properties of reconstruced skin need further improvement, many character-
istics resemble the in vivo situation. Besides a comparable morphology tissue, equivalents show
similar reactions with respect to physiology, whether this is a biochemical answer to irritating
compounds, the conversion of pharmacological active compounds by a comparable enzyme
system, a resembling xenobiotic metabolism, or a coculture of skin relevant cell types.
Therefore tissue equivalents are used as a reliable tool supporting product development
and since recently predicting the skin irritation potential of pure chemicals.
Further efforts are on the way to promote the acceptance of the use of these models also
for regulatory acceptance.
REFERENCES
1. Xu KP, Li XF, Yu FS. Corneal organ culture model for assessing epithelial responses to surfactants.
Toxicol Sci 2000; 58(2):306–314.
2. Maurer JK, Parker RD, Jester JV. Extent of initial corneal injury as the mechanistic basis for ocular
irritation: key findings and recommendations for the development of alternative assays. Regul Toxicol
Pharmacol 2002; 36(1):106–117.
3. Nguyen DH, Beuerman RW, De Wever B, et al. Three-dimensional construct of the human corneal
epithelium for in vitro toxicology. In: Harry Salem, Sidney Katz, eds. Alternative Toxicological
Methods. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 2003:147–159.
4. Germain L, Auger FA, Grandbois E, et al. Reconstructed human cornea produced in vitro by tissue
engineering. Pathobiology 1999; 67(3):140–147.
5. Griffith M, Osborne R, Munger R, et al. Functional human corneal equivalents constructed from cell
lines. Science 1999; 286(5447):2169–2172.
6. Reichl S, Bednarz J, Muller-Goymann CC. Human corneal equivalent as cell culture model for in vitro
drug permeation studies. Br J Ophthalmol 2004; 88(4):560–565.
7. Courtellement P. The use if in vitro reconstituted Human Corneal epithelium (HCE) in ocular
risk assessment. 1st International Workshop on the Use of Human Epidermal and Epithelial
Tissue Models Reconstituted in Chemically Defined Medium for Toxicology & Pharmacology. Nice,
France, 2002.
8. Lanvin M, Doucet O. In vitro Assessment of the eye irritating potential of chemicals & formulated
propducts by sing 3D-epithelial models. 2nd International SkinEthic Workshop on In vitro
Reconstituted Human Tissue Models in Applied Pharmacology and Toxicology Testing. Nice,
France, 2003.
9. Van Goethem F, Adriaens A, Ale´pe´e N, et al. Prevalidation of a new in vitro reconstituted human
cornea model to assess the eye irritating potential of chemicals. Toxicol In Vitro 2006; 20:1–17.
10. Sotozono C, He J, Matsumoto Y, et al. Cytokine expression in the alkali-burned cornea. Curr Eye Res
1997; 16(7):670–676.
544
Schro¨der

=== Page 562 ===
11. Nakamura Y, Sotozono C, Kinoshita S. Inflammatory cytokines in normal human tears. Curr Eye Res
1998; 17(6):673–676.
12. Cook EB, Stahl JL, Lowe L, et al. Simultaneous measurement of six cytokines in a single sample of
human tears using microparticle-based flow cytometry: allergics vs. non-allergics. J Immunol
Methods 2001; 254(1–2):109–118.
13. Imanishi J, Kamiyama K, Iguchi I, et al. Growth factors: importance in wound healing and
maintenance of transparency of the cornea. Prog Retin Eye Res 2000; 19(1):113–129.
14. Jozwiak J, Skopinski P, Grzela T, et al. Potential application of cytokine level measurement in corneal
epithelium. Int J Mol Med 2001; 7(6):665–667.
15. Offord EA, Sharif NA, Mace K, et al. Immortalized human corneal epithelial cells for ocular toxicity
and inflammation studies. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999; 40(6):1091–1101.
16. Gallico GG IIIrd, O’Connor NE, Compton CC, Kehinde O, Green H. Permanent coverage of large burn
wounds with autologous cultured human epithelium. N Engl J Med 1984; 311(7):448–451.
17. Ponec M, Boelsma E, Gibbs S, et al. Characterization of reconstructed skin models. Skin Pharmacol
Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15(suppl 1):4–17.
18. Gazel A, Ramphal P, Rosdy M, et al. Transcriptional profiling of epidermal keratinocytes: comparison
of genes expressed in skin, cultured keratinocytes, and reconstituted epidermis, using large DNA
microarrays. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 121(6):1459–1468.
19. Poumay Y, Dupont F, Marcoux S, et al. A simple reconstructed human epidermis: preparation of the
culture model and utilization in in vitro studies. Arch Dermatol Res 2004; 296(5):203–211.
20. Mewes KR, Raus M, Bernd A, et al. Elastin expression in a newly developed full-thickness skin
equivalent. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2007; 20(2):85–95.
21. Garcia N, Doucet O, Bayer M, et al. Characterization of the barrier function in a reconstructed human
epidermis cultivated in chemically defined medium. Int J Cosmet Sci 2002; 24:25–34.
22. Feingold KR. The regulation of epidermal lipid synthesis by permeability barrier requirements. Crit
Rev Ther Drug Carrier Syst 1991; 8(3):193–210.
23. Dreher F, Patouillet C, Fouchard F, et al. Improvement of the experimental setup to assess cutaneous
bioavailability on human skin models: dynamic protocol. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002;
15(suppl 1):31–39.
24. Lotte C, Patouillet C, Zanini M, et al. Permeation and skin absorption: reproducibility of various
industrial reconstructed human skin models. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15(suppl 1):18–30.
25. Gysler A, Ko¨nigsmann U, Scha¨fer-Korting M. Tridimensional skin models recording percutaneous
absorption. Altex 1999; 2:67–72.
26. Scha¨fer-Korting M, Bock U, Gamer A, et al. Reconstructed human epidermis for skin absorption
testing: results of the German prevalidation study. Altern Lab Anim 2006; 34(3):283–294.
27. Schmook FP, Meingassner JG, Billich A. Comparison of human skin or epidermis models with human
and animal skin in in-vitro percutaneous absorption. Int J Pharm 2001; 215(1–2):51–56.
28. Ponec M. Skin constructs for replacement of skin tissues for in vitro testing. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002;
54(suppl 1):S19–S30.
29. Coquette A, Berna N, Poumay Y, et al. The keratinocyte in cutaneuos irritation and sensitization. In:
Kydonieus AF, Wille JJ, eds. Biochemical modulation of skin reactions, Boca Raton, Florida: CRC
Press, 2000:125–143.
30. Faller C, Bracher M, Dami N, et al. Predictive ability of reconstructed human epidermis equivalents
for the assessment of skin irritation of cosmetics. Toxicol In Vitro 2002; 16(5):557–572.
31. Ponec M, Gibbs S, Pilgram G, et al. Barrier function in reconstructed epidermis and its resemblance to
native human skin. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2001; 14(suppl 1):63–71.
32. Ponec M, Kempenaar J. Use of human skin recombinants as an in vitro model for testing the irritation
potential of cutaneous irritants. Skin Pharmacol 1995; 8(1–2):49–59.
33. Spielmann H, Hoffmann S, Liebsch M, et al. The ECVAM international validation study on in vitro
tests for acute skin irritation: report on the validity of the EPISKIN and EpiDerm assays and on the
Skin Integrity Function Test. Altern Lab Anim 2007; 35(6):559–601.
34. De Wever, B andCharbonnier V. Using tissue engineered skin to evaluate the irritation potential of
skin care products. Cosmetics & Toiletries 2002; 117(10):28–38.
35. Welss T, Basketter DA, Schro¨der KR. In vitro skin irritation: facts and future. State of the art review of
mechanisms and models. Toxicology In Vitro 2004; 18:231–243.
36. Perkins MA, Osborne R, Rana FR, et al. Comparison of in vitro and in vivo human skin responses to
consumer products and ingredients with a range of irritancy potential. Toxicol Sci 1999; 48(2):218–229.
37. Gysler A, Kleuser B, Sippl W, et al. Skin penetration and metabolism of topical glucocorticoids in
reconstructed epidermis and in excised human skin. Pharm Res 1999; 16(9):1386–1391.
38. Bernard FX, Barrault C, Deguercy A, et al. Development of a highly sensitive in vitro phototoxicity
assay using the SkinEthic reconstructed human epidermis. Cell Biol Toxicol 2000; 16(6):391–400.
Reconstructed Corneal and Skin Models
545

=== Page 563 ===
39. Harris IR, Siefken W, Beck-Oldach K, et al. Comparison of activities dependent on glutathione
S-transferase and cytochrome P-450 IA1 in cultured keratinocytes and reconstructed epidermal
models. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15(suppl 1):59–67.
40. Harris IR, Siefken W, Beck-Oldach K, et al. NAD(P)H:quinone reductase activity in human epidermal
keratinocytes and reconstructed epidermal models. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15(suppl 1):
68–73.
41. Reisinger K, Wiegand C, Scheel J, et al. Genotoxicity testing and metabolism-studies unsing the
Phenion1 Full Thickness Skin Model. 6th World Congress on Alternatives & Animal Use in the Life
Science, Tokyo, Japan, 2007.
42. Gibbs S, van de Sandt JJ, Merk HF, et al. Xenobiotic metabolism in human skin and 3D human skin
reconstructs: a review. Curr Drug Metab 2007; 8(8):758–772.
43. Archambault M, Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. Keratinocytes and fibroblasts in a human skin equivalent
model enhance melanocyte survival and melanin synthesis after ultraviolet irradiation. J Invest
Dermatol 1995; 104(5):859–867.
44. Yoon TJ, Lei TC, Yamaguchi Y, et al. Reconstituted 3-dimensional human skin of various ethnic
origins as an in vitro model for studies of pigmentation. Anal Biochem 2003; 318(2):260–269.
546
Schro¨der

=== Page 564 ===
52
Seawater Salts: Effect on Inflammatory
Skin Disease
Ivy Lee
Department of Dermatology, Washington Hospital Center–Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Use of mineral spa water and seawater has been and continues to be a common treatment
modality for inflammatory skin conditions such as psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, and irritant
contact dermatitis. Spa water and seawater are noted for their relatively high concentrations of
minerals such as strontium and selenium and for their high osmolarity relative to physiological
saline (Table 1). Despite widespread use, few studies explore what aspect of seawater accounts
for its therapeutic effect and what is its mechanism of action. Recent studies are summarized in
Table 2 (1–4).
SEAWATER
Recent in vivo and in vitro studies lend credence to the common practice of applying seawater to
inflamed skin. In acute eruptions of atopic dermatitis, seawater exhibited antipruritic effects as
evaluated by a significant reduction of visual analogue scores for itching (1). In the setting of
irritant contact dermatitis, Pacific ocean water compresses significantly decreased transepidermal
water loss (TEWL) and increased skin capacitance compared with the deionized water control
when the compresses were applied for 20 minutes at a time for several times over the course of
two weeks (5). TEWL measures water barrier disruption, while capacitance measures stratum
corneum water content. Thus, the results provide evidence for seawater’s ability to inhibit skin
barrier disruption and inhibit stratum corneum dryness in irritant contact dermatitis. Seawater
has also been shown to be of benefit in psoriasis. In a randomized, double-blinded, controlled
study, Dead Sea1 salt baths, containing a high mineral composition, were administered daily at
358C for 20 minutes for three weeks. Relative to the distilled water control, Dead Sea salt baths
significantly decreased psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) scores in psoriasis vulgaris
patients immediately after treatment, with therapeutic effects still significant one month after the
treatment ended. However, there was no statistical difference in PASI scores and patient
subjective evaluations between the treatment group that received Dead Sea salt baths and the
group that received common salt baths [mostly sodium chloride (NaCl)] of the same osmolality.
While this study supports seawater’s therapeutic effects, it suggests that osmolality, instead of ion
character, may act as the active component in seawater therapy (2).
CATIONS
Sodium
As a substantial component of seawater, sodium has been explored as an explanation for
seawater’s therapeutic effect. Similar to seawater, compresses with 500-mM NaCl alone have
been shown to inhibit the increase in TEWL and increase skin capacitance and, thus, inhibit
skin barrier disruption and inhibit stratum corneum dryness in irritant contact dermatitis (5).
Sodium compresses for irritant contact dermatitis also decreased blood flow associated with
irritation relative to baseline values when applied for 30 minutes twice a day for four
consecutive days (6). However, the same study also showed that sodium compresses did not
significantly change the skin’s clinical appearance as measured by chromametry and clinical

=== Page 565 ===
scoring. Sodium’s role in seawater therapy is further questioned in this study by the finding that
there was no significant difference between sodium compresses and cool water compresses, and
the idea that neither osmolality nor ions but temperature explains the therapeutic effect of
seawater (6). In vitro psoriasis studies also imply that sodium may not account for seawater’s
clinical value. Psoriasis is characterized by epidermal hyperplasia and heightened mitotic
activity. In vitro, sodium salts failed to significantly affect fibroblast proliferation (3).
Potassium
As with sodium, studies yield conflicting results regarding potassium’s role in explaining
seawater therapy. The 10-mM KCl compresses inhibited skin barrier disruption by inhibiting
an increase in TEWL but had no effect on capacitance, and thus, on stratum corneum dryness
in irritant contact dermatitis (5). While potassium seems to have some effect on irritant contact
dermatitis, its effect on psoriasis is less clear. An in vitro psoriasis experiment showed that
potassium salts failed to significantly affect fibroblast proliferation (3), whereas another in
vitro study that included two-hour incubations with salt solutions of 0, 50, 100, and 300 mM
demonstrated that potassium salts were more effective than those of sodium and magnesium
in reversibly inhibiting fibroblast proliferation and that KBr’s inhibitory effect was similar to
that of Dead Sea water (positive control) (4).
Magnesium
Recent studies suggest that magnesium has a greater influence on inflammatory processes in
psoriasis than in irritant contact dermatitis. The 55-mM magnesium salt compresses showed no
significant effects on barrier disruption or stratum corneum dryness in irritant contact dermatitis
(5). However, magnesium illustrated significant and immediate (within 24 hours of treatment)
inhibition of fibroblast proliferation in the in vitro psoriasis studies (3). Additional in vitro and in
vivo studies showed that magnesium ions reduced the antigen-presenting capacity of
Langerhans cells and are associated with reduced expression of HLA-DR and costimulatory
B7 molecules by Langerhans cells (7). This last study hints at a possible role for magnesium in
limiting the initial immune response or ongoing inflammation process in psoriasis.
Strontium and Selenium
Long suspected as the reason for the efficacy of Dead Sea water therapy, strontium and
selenium have been shown to possess anti-inflammatory properties.
In a double-blind, vehicle-controlled, random-treatment study on irritant contact
dermatitis, strontium salts were applied topically as pretreatment or mixed with irritant and
were found to decrease the duration and magnitude of inflammation and sensory irritation
(stinging, burning, and itching) without local anesthetic effects. Strontium inhibited total
cumulative irritation from 56% to 81% according to a patient report, and these findings held
true for the broad range of chemically unrelated irritants such as glycolic acid, lactic acid,
aluminum chloride, and calcium thioglycolate that were used in the study (8). In another
study, strontium exhibited anti-inflammatory effects on the molecular level.
An in vitro, controlled study looked at the effects of strontium and selenium on
cutaneous inflammatory cytokines, IL-1a, IL-6, and TNF-a, at concentrations similar to those
found in the Dead Sea. A weeklong continuous immersion of both healthy and atopic
dermatitis skin in 260-mg/L strontium showed that strontium did not significantly affect
cytokine levels in healthy skin. However, the study did show that strontium salts significantly
Table 1
Composition of Seawater at 3.5% Salinity
Element
Atomic weight
Parts per million
Sodium (NaCl)
22.9898
10,800
Potassium
39.102
392
Magnesium
24.312
1290
Strontium
87.62
8.1
Selenium
78.96
0.0009
Bromine
79.909
67.3
Note: Parts per million ¼ mg/L ¼ 0.001 g/kg.
Source: Adapted from www.cea-life.com.
548
Lee and Maibach

=== Page 566 ===
Table 2
Seawater and Its Effects on Inflammed Skin
Source
No. of
patients
Type of
dermatitis
Therapy
Duration
Evaluation
Significant results
Conclusion
Yoshizawa
et al. (12)
3
Irritant
dermatitis
Sea water
(Pacific ocean)
20 min, 8
over 2 wk
TEWL,
capacitance
;TEWL,
capacitance
Inhibits barrier disruption
and stratum corneum
dryness
500 mM NaCl
;TEWL,
:capacitance
Inhibits barrier disruption
and stratum corneum
dryness
10 mM KCl
;TEWL
Inhibits barrier disruption only
55 mM MgCl2
Not significant
10 mM CaCl2
Not significant
Levin and
Maibach (6)
9
Irritant
dermatitis
H2O compress
30 min, b.i.d.
for 4 day
TEWL, LDF,
chromametry,
clinical score
;TEWL, LDF
Both compresses equally inhibit
barrier disruption and
microcirculatory blood flow
associated with inflammation but do
not affect the clinical score or color
Physiological
saline compress
;TEWL, LDF
Celerier
et al. (1)
In vitro
Atopic
dermatitis
Spa water
1 wk continuous
immersion
Inflammatory
cytokine levels:
IL-1a, IL-6, TNF-a
;IL-1a, ;;;IL-6, ;TNF-a
Inhibits all three cytokines, but
inhibits IL-6 to a greater degree
260 mg/L SrNO3
;IL-1a, ;;;IL-6, ;;TNF-a
Sr salts inhibit all three cytokines,
but inhibit IL-6 to a greater degree.
Sr salts selectively inhibit TNF-a
production
260 mg/L SrCl2
;IL-1a, ;;;IL-6 ;;TNF-a
60 mg/L SeCl2
;IL-1a, ;; IL-6, ;TNF-a
Se salts inhibit all three cytokines,
but inhibit IL-6 to a greater degree.
Se salts selectively inhibit IL-1a
production
60 mg/L SeNaO3
;;IL-1a, ;;; IL-6, ;TNF-a
60 mg/L SeNaO4
;;IL-1a, ;;; IL-6, ;TNF-a
Hiramatsu
et al. (1)
20
Atopic
dermatitis
Salt water
4 wk
VASa for itching
5.05  1.53% (pre) to
2.8  2.4% (post)
Decreased itching of acute eruptions
(Continued)
Seawater Salts: Effect on Inflammatory Skin Disease
549

=== Page 567 ===
Table 2
Seawater and Its Effects on Inflammed Skin (Continued )
Source
No. of
patients
Type of
dermatitis
Therapy
Duration
Evaluation
Significant results
Conclusion
Halevy
et al. (2)
30
Psoriasis
vulgaris
358C Dead
sea salt bath
20 min q.d.
for 3 wk
PASI, patient-
subjective
evaluation
34.8  24% reduction
after 3 wk, 43.6  31.1%
reduction after 7 wk
Dead sea salt bath significantly
decreased PASI over course of
treatment; effect lasted for 1 mo
after treatment. However, the Dead
Sea salt bath’s effect on PASI did
not significantly differ from the
common salt bath.
Gambichler
et al. (2001)
10
Psoriasis
NaCl (24%)
immersion
followed by
phototherapy
(280–365 nm)
20 min, 30
over 7.5 wk
Clinical score
(desquamation
erythema, infiltration
of plaques)
68.4% reduction from
baseline
Significant decrease in clinical score
from, baseline, but effect is, not
significantly different from tap water
control.
Levi-Schaffer
et al. (3)
In vitro
Psoriasis
75 mM NaCl
75 mM KCl
75 mM MgCl2
75 mM MgBr2
75 mM KBr
1, 2, or 3 days
Fibroblast
proliferation,
cAMP levels
MgCl2 inhibits proliferation
by 50.7  2.2%; MgBr2 inhibits
proliferation by 55.0  2.3%;
No treatment significantly
affected cAMP levels
Mg salts had a significantly stronger
inhibitory effect on fibroblast than
other proliferation salt treatments of
the same osmolarity. The inhibitory
effect was immediate (within 24 hr)
Shani
et al. (4)
In vitro
Psoriasis
0, 50, 100,
300 mM NaCl
2-hr incubation
Thymidine
incorporation
Maximum reduction 44.4%
Br salts significantly inhibit growth
greater than Cl salts. K exerted the
greatest growth inhibition with KBr’s
inhibitory effect similar to that of the
diluted Dead Sea brine.
0, 50, 100,
300 mM NaBr
52.4%
0, 50, 100,
300 mM KCl
54.3%
0, 50, 100,
300 mM KBr
86.5%
0, 50, 100,
300 mM MgCl2
32.5%
0, 50, 100,
300 mM MgBr2
47.7%
aVisual analog scale.
550
Lee and Maibach

=== Page 568 ===
inhibited all three cytokines relative to baseline values, but that strontium selectively inhibited
TNF-a to a greater degree (9).
A potential role for selenium in reducing inflammatory processes in skin has also been
supported by recent studies. In the aforementioned study, healthy and atopic dermatitis skins
were also immersed in 60-mg/L selenium solution for one week. In normal, healthy skin,
selenium significantly decreased IL-1a cytokine levels but had no effect on IL-6 or TNF-a levels
relative to that of the control medium. In atopic dermatitis skin, selenium salts significantly
inhibited all three cytokines relative to baseline values but selectively inhibited IL-1a to a
greater degree (9). Selenium has also been correlated with the duration and severity of
psoriasis and may be related to the protective function of selenoproteins (thioredoxin
reductases and glutathione peroxidases) against ultraviolet-induced cell damage and death.
Both low plasma selenium and low plasma glutathione peroxidase activity have been seen in
psoriasis patients. Patients with a longer history (>3 years) of psoriasis exhibited a
significantly lower selenium level compared with patients with a shorter history of psoriasis
(<10 months). Selenium also seemed to correlate with the severity of psoriasis in this study. A
significant inverse relationship was found between RBC glutathione peroxidase and psoriasis
area and severity index scores in individuals with psoriasis of greater than three years (10).
ANIONS
Bromine
Of the few anions in seawater that are studied, bromine affects skin disease processes the most.
In an in vitro study of psoriasis with two-hour incubation with Dead Sea brine, NaCl, NaBr,
KCl, KBr, MgCl, MgBr at 0, 50, 100, and 300 mM, bromide salts significantly inhibited
fibroblast proliferation as compared with chloride salts. When combined with potassium in
KBr, bromine’s inhibitory effect was similar to that of diluted Dead Sea (positive control) (4). In
another in vitro study, magnesium bromide inhibited fibroblast proliferation to a greater
extent than magnesium chloride (55.0 þ 2.3% vs. 50.7 þ 2.2%), lending further evidence that if
anions play a part in seawater therapy, bromine, not chlorine, is most likely to be the active
anion (3).
With a paucity of studies and small sample sizes in each study, it is difficult to
definitively say whether seawater or its individual components offer any clinical benefit in the
inflammations of the skin. If seawater is proven to have therapeutic value, further studies will
be needed to explore whether it is the synergism between seawater’s various components, the
osmolality, or individual ions alone that mediate its effect. As inflammatory skin diseases like
eczema and psoriasis are accompanied by a defect in permeability barrier function, improving
barrier function results in reduced inflammation. Thus, possible mechanisms of action of
seawater salts include putative effects on barrier functions. This effect of ions on barrier
function has been studied extensively (11,12). Currently, Dead Sea salt is sold in many
countries and is used in clinical treatments and private bathtubs, but in much lower
concentrations than the Dead Sea itself. Recent interest in the science of alternative medicines
may be a stimulus for a more complete biological analysis of these ancient practices.
REFERENCES
1. Hiramatsu H, Seino M, Nagase A, et al. Salt water therapy for patients with atopic dermatitis.
Nishinihon J Dermatol 1998; 60:346–349.
2. Halevy S, Giryes H, Friger M, et al. Dead sea bath salt for the treatment of psoriasis vulgaris: a double-
blind controlled study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 1997; 9:237–242.
3. Levi-Schaffer F, Shani J, Politi Y, et al. Inhibition of proliferation of psoriatic and healthy fibroblasts in
cell culture by selected dead sea salts. Pharmacology 1996; 52:321–328.
4. Shani J, Sharon R, Koren R, et al. Effect of dead sea brine and its main salts on cell growth in culture.
Pharmacology 1987; 35:339–347.
5. Yoshizawa Y, Tanojo H, Kim SJ, et al. Seawater or its components alter experimental irritant dermatitis
in man. Skin Res Tech 2001; 7:36–39.
6. Levin C, Maibach H. Do cool water or physiologic saline compresses enhance resolution of
experimentally induced irritant contact dermatitis? Contact Derm 2001; 45:146–150.
Seawater Salts: Effect on Inflammatory Skin Disease
551

=== Page 569 ===
7. Schempp C, Dittmar H, Hummler D, et al. Magnesium ions inhibit the antigen-presenting function of
human epidermal Langerhans cells in vivo and in vitro. Involvement of ATPase, HLA-DR, B7
molecules, and cytokines. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 115:680–686.
8. Hahn G. Strontium is a potent and selective inhibitor of sensory irritation. Dermatol Surg 1999;
25:689–694.
9. Celerier P, Richard A, Litoux P, et al. Modulatory effects of selenium and strontium salts on
keratinocyte-derived inflammatory cytokines. Arch Dermatol Res 1995; 287:680–682.
10. Serwin A, Wasowicz W, Gromadzinska J, et al. Selenium status in psoriasis and its relation to the
duration and severity of the disease. Nutrition 2003; 19:301–304.
11. Mauro T, Dixon DB, Komuyes L, et al. Keratinocyte Kþ channels mediate Ca2 þ-induced differentiation.
J Invest Dermatol 1997; 108(6):864–870.
12. Mauro T, Guitard M, Behne M, et al. The ENac channel is required for normal epidermal differentiation.
J Invest Dermatol 2002; 118(4):589–594.
552
Lee and Maibach

=== Page 570 ===
53
Allergy and Hypoallergenic Products
An E. Goossens
University Hospital, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
The assessment and detection of the number of contact allergic reactions to cosmetics are not
simple. Generally, a consumer who has a problem with cosmetics will consult a doctor only if
he or she does not recognize the cause to be a particular cosmetic product, or if the dermatitis
persists when the suspected product has been replaced by another, determined by trial and
error. Consequently, only a small proportion of the population with cosmetic intolerance
problems is ever seen by a dermatologist. Moreover, cosmetic reactions may present in
unusual clinical forms, which may evoke an erroneous diagnosis (1–3).
In general, adverse effects are underreported (4), certainly to the cosmetics industry,
which obtains its most reliable information in this regard mainly from the relatively few
dermatologists who concentrate on cosmetic-intolerance problems and from reports in the
literature that are, almost by definition, out of date. Sometimes beauticians and consumers
report adverse reactions, but in most cases this kind of information is difficult to objectify
unless a dermatologist verifies it.
Application of cosmetic products to the skin may cause irritant, phototoxic, contact, and
photocontact allergic reactions as well as contact urticaria. It is generally agreed that most skin-
adverse reactions to cosmetic products are irritant in nature and that people with “sensitive
skin,” as indicated by conditions like atopic dermatitis, rosacea, or seborrheic dermatitis, are
particularly liable to develop such reactions. However, contact allergic reactions attract much
more attention and thus tend to be overestimated (4). Indeed, the identification of cosmetic
allergen is by no means a simple task. It demands special skills and interest on the part of the
dermatologist, although labeling of all cosmetic ingredients is facilitating that task. Moreover,
there are many factors involved in the sensitization to a specific cosmetic product, all of which
have to be taken into account when one seeks an allergen (1,2) (see the following section).
FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO CONTACT ALLERGIC
REACTIONS TO A COSMETIC PRODUCT
Frequency of Use
One may expect the frequently used products to cause more skin reactions than the more
exclusive products, simply because more people are exposed to the former. This alone does not
imply anything about the quality of these products (the same thing may be said about
individual cosmetic ingredients).
Composition
The complexity of a formula can be either positive or negative, as far as its allergenicity is
concerned. One of the principles of creating “hypoallergenic” cosmetics and perfumes is the
simplicity of formula. The fewer the constituents, the easier it is to identify the offending
substance should difficulties arise, and there would be a lesser danger of synergism. The
presence of more ingredients leads to an increase in the chance of the skin’s sensitization to one
of them. However, some investigators recommend placing upper limits on concentrations,
rather than advising against the use of any particular ingredient. They may also suggest more
complex formulas (5). Preservatives needed for water-based or other easily contaminated
products are the common cosmetic allergens. It seems that it is very difficult to combine potent
antimicrobial and antifungal properties with low allergenicity. Indeed, it is very difficult to
restrict the biological activity of a substance to a single domain.

=== Page 571 ===
Concentration of Ingredients
Although the use of low concentrations does not assure complete safety, the incidence of
sensitization induction is indeed a function of the concentration of the allergen, at least to some
extent. Cases of allergy to the preservative agent methyl (chloro)isothia-zolinone illustrate this
problem very well. At first, a 50-ppm concentration of this agent was allowed for use in
cosmetic products in the European community, following which this concentration was
actually used in some products; there were “epidemics” of contact allergic reactions to it (6). Of
late, the frequency of positive reactions has been diminishing considerably, not only because
its use is declining and primarily limited to “rinse-off” products (3) but also because its usage
concentration has been reduced to about 15 to 7.5 ppm (as the manufacturers recommended).
Of course, once a patient has become sensitized, even low concentrations can trigger a reaction.
Purity of Ingredients
It is impossible to refine raw materials to absolute purity. A more or less strict quality control
of raw materials and finished products has long been the general practice in modern cosmetic
manufacturing. However, one can never rule out the sensitizing potential of impurities in these
materials (5).
Common Use of Cosmetic Ingredients in Pharmaceuticals
Patients easily become sensitized to topical pharmaceutical products, which, unlike cosmetics,
are most often used on a diseased skin. However, once sensitization has occurred, they may
react also to the cosmetics containing the same ingredients (5).
The Role of Cross-Sensitivity
Chemically related substances are likely to induce cross-reactions, and contact eczematous
lesions may be maintained in this way. This is especially the case with perfume ingredients,
which often cross-react with each other, and applies to all other cosmetic ingredients as well.
Penetration-Enhancing Substances
The chemical environment can substantially affect a person’s sensitizing potential of
individual chemicals. For example, emulsifiers and solvents enhance skin penetration, and
thereby contact sensitization. Penetration-enhancing agents can also be the root of false-
negative patch test reactions; the cosmetic product itself may be clearly allergenic (or irritant),
although the individual ingredients, abstracted from the environment of the product and
tested separately, may not cause a reaction.
Application Site
Some areas of the skin, like the eyelids, are particularly prone to contact dermatitis reactions.
A cream applied to the entire face, such as a face care product, along with hair products
may cause an allergic reaction only on the eyelids. Moreover, “ectopic dermatitis” [caused by
the transfer of an allergen by hand, as often occurs with tosylamide/formaldehyde (i.e., para-
toluenesulfonamideformaldehyde) resin, the allergen in nail polish], “airborne” contact
dermatitis (e.g., caused by perfumes) (7), as well as “connubial” dermatitis (caused by products
shared between partners) (8) often occur only on “sensitive” skin areas such as the eyelids,
lips, and neck.
Moreover, the penetration potential of cosmetics is heightened in certain “occluded”
areas, such as the body folds (axillary, inguinal) and the anogenital region, because of which
the risk of contact sensitization is increased. In the body folds, the allergenic reactions tend to
persist for weeks after the initial contact with the allergen. This may be partly attributable to
the residual contamination of clothing as well as the increased penetration of the allergen,
which is certainly assisted by occlusion and friction (9). Indeed, a reservoir may be formed
from which the allergen is subsequently released.
Condition of the Skin
Application on a damaged skin, where the skin barrier is impaired, enhances the penetration of
substances and thus increases the risk of an allergic reaction. This is the case with body care
products used to alleviate dry, atopic skin and with barrier creams used for protecting the
hands, which often suffer from irritancy problems (e.g., dryness, cracking). Sometimes, the
554
Goossens

=== Page 572 ===
allergic reaction may be limited to certain areas of the skin (areas already affected react more
readily to another application of the same allergen) and may even present an unusual clinical
picture that does not immediately suggest contact dermatitis. Indeed, contact allergic reactions
to preservative agents on the face may present as a lymphocytic infiltrate or even have a lupus
erythematous-like picture (3,10).
Contact Time
In the world of cosmetics, a distinction is now being made between leave-on products, which
remain on the skin for several hours (e.g., face- and body care products and makeup), and
rinse-off products, which are removed almost immediately.
The division between these two kinds of products is not always relevant to the
sensitization process, because a thin film can remain on the skin and be sufficient to allow
ingredients to penetrate. This occurs, for example, with moist toilet paper (with mainly
preservatives as the allergens) and makeup removers.
Frequency of Application and Cumulative Effects
Daily or several-times-a-day usage of cosmetics may cause ingredients to accumulate in the
skin and thus increase the risk of adverse reactions. In fact, the concentration of an ingredient
may be too low to induce sensitivity in a single product, but may reach critical levels in the
skin if several products containing it are used consecutively. This may be the case for people
who are loyal to the same brand of products, e.g., day and night creams, foundations, and
cleansing products, because a manufacturer will often use the same preservative system for all
his products. This should be taken into consideration by companies that use biologically active
ingredients such as preservative agents, emulsifiers, antioxidants, and perfumes, because it
might well account for many of the adverse reactions to these particular substances. In our
experience, intense users of cosmetics are more prone to cosmetic dermatitis than others.
CORRELATIONS WITH THE LOCATION OF THE LESIONS
Like many other contact allergens, cosmetics can reach the skin by several different ways (1,2):
by direct application; by airborne exposure to vapors, droplets, or particles that are released
into the atmosphere and then settle on the skin (7); by contact with people (partners, friends,
coworkers) who transmit allergens to cause “connubial” or “consort” dermatitis (8); by transfer
from other sites on the body, often the hands, to more sensitive areas such as the mouth or the
eyelids (ectopic dermatitis); and by exposure to the sun with photoallergens.
The most common sources of cosmetic allergens applied directly to the body are listed in
Table 1.
THE NATURE OF COSMETIC ALLERGENS
Fragrance Ingredients
Fragrance ingredients are the most frequent culprits in cosmetic allergies (11–15). Katsarar
et al., who investigated the results of patch testing over a 12-year period, found an increasing
trend in the sensitivity to fragrance compounds, which reflects the effectiveness of the
advertising of perfumed products (16). Common features of a fragrance contact dermatitis are
localization in the axillae, localization on the face (including the eyelids) and neck, well-
circumscribed patches that appear in areas where dabbing-on perfumes are used (wrists,
behind the ears), and hand eczema or its aggravation. Airborne or connubial contact dermatitis
should be considered as well. Other less-frequent adverse reactions to fragrances are
photocontact dermatitis, contact urticaria, irritation, and pigmentation disorders (17).
Sensitization is most often induced by highly perfumed products, such as toilet waters,
aftershave lotions, and deodorants, the last of which have been shown to contain well-known
allergens such as cinnamal (cinnamic aldehyde) and isoeugenol (18).
As reported in the literature, the fragrance mix remains the best screening agent for
contact allergy caused by perfumes, because it would detect some 70% to 80 % of all perfume
allergies (19,20). However, it depicts also the need to test with additional perfume allergens.
Allergy and Hypoallergenic Products
555

=== Page 573 ===
Indeed, testing with additional markers, for example, the individual components such
as hydroxyisohexyl 3-cyclohexene carboxaldehyde (Lyral1), farnesol, and citral, as well as
with the complex natural mixtures (21–25), increases the sensitivity of the testing. Because of the
increasing importance of fragrance allergy and to ensure that sensitized consumers are
adequately informed, 26 fragrance components are labeled as cosmetic ingredients on the
package [Annex 3 (Table 2 of the cosmetic irective (26)]. With fragrance, allergy-associated
positive patch test reactions frequently occur and often indicate the presence of common or
cross-reacting ingredients in natural products, the occurrence of cross-reactions between simple
fragrance chemicals, or concomitant sensitivity. Moreover, oxidation products of fragrance
ingredients, such as limonene (27) or resin acids (being the main allergens in colophony), found
as contaminants in tree moss (a widely used substitute for oak moss) as well as in oak moss itself
(28), play an important role in the allergenic potential of these substances (29).
Preservatives
Among the allergy-causing agents, preservatives are second in frequency to fragrance
ingredients; they are important allergens in cleansers, skin care products, and makeup (2,30).
However, within this class, important shifts have occurred over the years (30,31).
The methyl(chloro)isothiazolinone mixture was commonly used in the 1980s and was
then a frequent cause of contact allergies. This frequency has declined considerably in recent
years (3,12). Since then, formaldehyde and its releasers, particularly methyldibromo
glutaronitrile—as used in a mixture with phenoxyethanol, better known as Euxyl K400—did
gain importance in this regard (12,30–34), although the frequency of positive reactions
observed seems to be influenced by the patch test concentration (33,34).
The spectrum of the allergenic preservatives also varies from country to country. For
example, in contrast to continental Europe where reactions to the methyl-(chloro)-
isothiazolinone mixture and, more recently, methyldibromo glutaronitrile have been the
most frequent (12,13,30,31,35), in the United Kingdom, formaldehyde and its releasers have
always been much more important, particularly as concerns quaternium-15 (30), although its
incidence seems to have slightly decreased of late (36). Parabens are rare causes of cosmetic
dermatitis. When a paraben allergy does occur, the sensitization source is most often a topical
pharmaceutical product, although its presence in other products can be sensitizing as well (37);
this is often the case for other ingredients also. For instance, a young lady, after having
previously been sensitized to mefenesin in a rubefacient, presented with an acute contact
Table 1
Cosmetic and Cosmetic-Related Dermatitis Caused by Direct Application of the Allergen
Area of dermatitis
Cosmetics that may contain allergens
Face in general
Facial skin care products (creams, lotions, masks), sunscreen
products, makeup (foundations, blushes, powders), cleansers
(lotions, emulsions), and cosmetic appliances (sponges),
perfumed products (aftershave lotion)
Forehead
Hair care products (dyes, shampoos)
Eyebrows
Eyebrow pencil, depilatory tweezers
Upper eyelids
Eye makeup (eye shadow, eye pencils, mascara), eyelash curlers
Lower eyelids
Eye makeup
Nostrils
Perfumed handkerchiefs
Lips, mouth, and perioral area
Lipstick, lip pencils, dental products (toothpaste, mouthwash),
depilatories
Neck and retroauricular area
Perfumes, toilet waters, hair care products
Head
Hair care products (hair dyes, permanent-wave solutions, bleaches,
shampoo ingredients), cosmetic appliances (metal combs,
hairpins)
Ears
Hair care products, perfume
Trunk/upper chest, arms, wrists
Body care products, sunscreens, and self-tanning products, (elbow
flexures) cleansers, depilatories
Axillae
Deodorants, antiperspirants, depilatories
Anogenital areas
Deodorants, moist toilet paper, perfumed pads, depilatories
Hands
Hand care products, barrier creams, all cosmetic products that come
in contact with the hands
Feet
Foot care products, antiperspirants
556
Goossens

=== Page 574 ===
dermatitis on the face at the first application of a new cosmetic cream containing chlorphenesin,
which was used as a preservative agent (data on file). Apparently, it is a potential sensitizing
agent (38) and cross-reacts with mefenesin, which is used in pharmaceuticals.
Antioxidants
Antioxidants form only a minor group of cosmetic allergens. Examples are propyl gallate,
which may cross-react with other gallates and are also used as food additives, and t-butyl
hydroquinone, a well-known allergen in the United Kingdom, but not in Europe (30). Sodium
metabisulfite, present in oxidative hair dyes (data on file), may cause allergic contact dermatitis
both to the clients and to the hairdressers.
“Active” or Category-Specific Ingredients
With regard to “active” or category-specific ingredients, in contrast to de Groot (3), we found
an increase in the number of reactions to oxidative hair dyes (paraphenylenediamine or PPD
and related compounds) during the period 1991 to 1996, as compared with the period 1985–
1990 (12,13). According to one cosmetic manufacturer (personal communication, L’Ore´al,
1997), the use of such hair dyes has more than doubled in recent years. However, the
replacement since 1987 of PPD-hydrochloride by a PPD base—a more appropriate screening
agent for PPD allergy—may also have influenced the incidence (39). They are important causes
of professional dermatitis in hairdressers who also often react to allergens in bleaches
(persulfates, also causes of contact urticaria) and permanent-wave solutions (primarily
glyceryl monothioglycolate, which may provoke cross-sensitivity to ammonium thioglycolate)
(40,41). Tosylamide/formaldehyde (¼ toluenesulfonamide/formaldehyde) resin is considered
an important allergen (4) and is the cause of ectopic dermatitis attributable to nail lacquer,
Table 2
Twenty-six Substances to be Labeled Regardless of Function and Origin
References in Annex III
of the cosmetics directive
Name in the cosmetics directive
INCI name
(67)
Amyl cinnamal
Amyl cinnamal
(68)
Benzyl alcohol
Benzyl alcohol
(69)
Cinnamyl alcohol
Cinnamyl alcohol
(70)
Citral
Citral
(71)
Eugenol
Eugenol
(72)
Hydroxy-citronellal
Hydroxycitronellal
(73)
Isoeugenol
Isoeugenol
(74)
Amyl cinnamyl alcohol
Amylcinnamyl alcohol
(75)
Benzyl salicylate
Benzyl salicylate
(76)
Cinnamal
Cinnamal
(77)
Coumarin
Coumarin
(78)
Geraniol
Geraniol
(79)
Hydroxymethylpentyl-
cyclohexenecarboxaldehyde
Hydroxyisohexyl 3-cyclohexene
Carboxaldehyde
(80)
Anisyl alcohol
Anise alcohol
(81)
Benzyl cinnamate
Benzyl cinnamate
(82)
Farnesol
Farnesol
(83)
2-(4-tert-butylbenzyl) propionaldehyde
Butylphenyl methylpropional
(84)
Linalool
Linalool
(85)
Benzyl benzoate
Benzyl benzoate
(85)
Hexyl cinnamaldehyde
Hexyl cinnamal
(86)
Citronellol
Citronellol
(88)
d-Limonene
Limonene
(89)
Methyl heptin carbonate
Methyl 2-octynoate
(90)
3-Metyl-4-(2,6,6-trimethyl-
2-cyclohexen-1-yl)-3-buten-2-one
a-isomethyl ionone
(91)
Oak moss extract
EU: Evernia prunastri
U.S.A.: Evernia prunastri
(oak moss) extract
(92)
Tree moss extract
EU: Evernia furfuracea
U.S.A.: Evernia furfuracea
(tree moss) extract
Allergy and Hypoallergenic Products
557

=== Page 575 ===
which may also contain epoxy and (meth) acrylate compounds (3). It often gives rise to
confusing clinical pictures and may mimic professional dermatitis (42). Acrylates (methacrylates)
are also causes of reactions to artificial nail preparations, more recently to gel formulations, with
both manicurists and their clients (43).
Moreover, “natural” ingredients may induce contact allergic reactions as well. Some
examples are butcher broom (Ruscus aculateus), which is also a potential allergen in topical
pharmaceutical products (44), hydrocotyl (asiaticoside) (45), and panthenol (46). Farnesol, a
well-known perfume ingredient and cross-reacting agent to balsam of Peru, has become a
potential allergen in deodorants, in which it is used for its bacteriostatic properties (47).
Some sunscreen agents such as benzophenone-3, which may also cause contact urticaria,
and dibenzoylmethane derivatives have been recognized in the past as being important
allergens (3,30,48–50). Indeed, isopropyl dibenzoylmethane was even withdrawn for this
reason (3). 4-Methylbenzylidene camphor, cinnamates, and phenylbenzimidazole sulfonic acid
are only occasional, sometimes even rare, causes of cosmetic reactions. The use of para-
aminobenzoic acid and its derivatives has decreased considerably. Contact allergic reactions to
them were generally related to their chemical relationship to para-amino compounds (51),
although they were also important photosensitizers (48).
In our experience (12,13,30), the contribution of sunscreens to cosmetic allergy is
relatively small, despite the increase in their use as a result of the media attention given to the
carcinogenic and accelerated skin-aging effects of sunlight. The low rate of allergic reactions
observed may well be because a contact allergy or a photo-allergy to sunscreen products is often
not recognized, since a differential diagnosis with a primary sun intolerance is not always
obvious. Furthermore, the patch test concentrations generally used might be too low (52), in part,
because of the risk of irritancy.
Excipients and Emulsifiers
Many excipients and emulsifiers are common ingredients to topical pharmaceutical and
cosmetic products, the former being likely to induce sensitization. Typical examples are wool
alcohols, fatty alcohols (e.g., cetyl alcohol), and propylene glycol (13). Emulsifiers in particular
have long been regarded as irritants, but their sensitization capacities should not be
overlooked. It is imperative, of course, that patch testing be properly performed to avoid
irritancy, and that the relevance of the positive reactions be determined. This is certainly the
case for cocamidopropyl betaine, an amphoteric tenside mainly present in hair- and skin-
cleansing products. Whether the compound itself or cocamidopropyl dimethylamine, an
amidoamine, or dimethylaminopropylamine (both intermediates from the synthesis) are the
actual sensitizers, is still a matter of discussion (53,54). It is also not clear whether cocamidopropyl-
PG-dimonium chloride phosphate (phospholipid FTC (55), an allergen in skin care products,
can cross-react with cocamidopropyl betaine. Other emulsifiers and vehicle components that
were more recently found to be contact allergens in cosmetics are maleated soybean oil (56),
butylene glycol and pentylene glycol (aliphatic alcohols with similar uses to propylene glycol
that is considered to have more irritant and allergenic effects) (57,58), ethylhexylglycerin
(syn.: octoxyglycerin) (59), methoxy PEG-17 and PEG-22/dodecyl glycol copolymers (alkoxylated
alcohols and synthetic polymers) (60), and alkylglucosides (condensation products of fatty
alcohols with glucose) (61,62).
Coloring Agents
Coloring agents, other than hair dyes, have rarely been reported as cosmetic allergens. However,
with the increased use of cosmetic tattoos (e.g., eye and lip makeup), more treatment-resistant
skin lesions might develop in the future (63).
DIAGNOSING COSMETIC ALLERGY
Taking the history of the patient and noting the clinical symptoms and localization of the
lesions are critical. Allergen identification for a patient with a possible contact allergy to
cosmetics is performed by means of patch testing with the standard series, specific cosmetic
test series, the product itself, and with all its ingredients. We can only find the allergens we
look for. There are several guidelines for skin tests with cosmetic products that the patients
558
Goossens

=== Page 576 ===
supply themselves (64). Not only the patch and photo-patch tests, but also semi-open tests,
usage tests, or repeated open application tests may be needed to be performed to obtain a
correct diagnosis.
HYPOALLERGENIC PRODUCTS
Most of the cosmetic industry is making a great effort to commercialize safest possible
products. Some manufacturers market cosmetics containing raw materials that have a “low”
sensitization index or a high degree of purity, or from which certain components have been
eliminated (5,65) (generally perfume ingredients). Sometimes active preservative agents are
also omitted, and in sunscreens immunologically inert physical agents are being used more
often than chemical ultraviolet absorbers.
Statements such as “recommended by dermatologists,” “allergy-tested,” or “hypoaller-
genic” have been put on the packaging material by manufacturers, to distinguish their products
from those of their competitors. Although there are several ways to reduce allergenicity (3), there
are no governmentally mandated standards or industry requirements (66).
The latest trend is target marketing to people with a “hypersensitive” or “intolerant” skin,
a term often used for the shadowy zone between normal and pathological skin. These would be
the people with increased neurosensitivity (e.g., atopics), heightened immune responsiveness
(e.g., atopic and contact allergic individuals), or a defective skin barrier, i.e., people with irritable
skin such as atopics, those suffering from seborrheic dermatitis (67), or rosacea. This means that
part of the cosmetic industry is moving more into the area of pathological skin and that certain
products are in fact becoming drugs, often called cosmeceuticals. This has caused a great deal of
regulatory concern (68,69), both in the United States and the European Union because it suggests
some middle category between cosmetics and drugs that does not yet legally exist. In Japan,
however, these products fall in the category of “quasi-drugs.”
The meaning of most such claims used nowadays is unclear, both for the dermatologist
(65–67) and the consumer, the latter being convinced that the hypersensitive skin is the allergic
skin. It is the dermatologist’s task to diagnose the skin condition and to provide specific
advice about the products that can safely be used. All such problems must be approached
individually, at least the contact allergic types, because people sensitive to specific ingredients
must avoid products containing them.
Therefore, ingredient labeling can be of tremendous help. Providing the allergic patient
with a limited list of cosmetics that can be used is practical and effective (70).
CONCLUSION
The identification of cosmetic allergens is challenging because of the extreme complexity of the
problem. This applies not only for the dermatologist who is trying to identify the culprit and
advise his patient but also certainly for cosmetic manufacturers who are extremely concerned
about assuring the innocuousness of their products. Precise, current, and rapid information
about the adverse reactions to cosmetic products is critical in a product design. Apparently,
premarketing studies are unable to identify all the pitfalls. Therefore, fruitful communication
that is developing between dermatologists and cosmetic manufacturers must be encouraged.
Sensitivity to cosmetics can never be totally avoided, but its incidence can be substantially
reduced.
REFERENCES
1. Dooms-Goossens A. Contact allergy to cosmetics. Cosmet Toilet 1993; 108:43–46.
2. Dooms-Goossens A. Cosmetics as causes of allergic contact dermatitis. Cutis 1993; 52:316–320.
3. de Groot AC. Fatal attractiveness: the shady side of cosmetics. Clin Dermatol 1998; 16:167–179.
4. Berne B, Bostro¨m A, Grahne´n AF, et al. Adverse effects of cosmetics and toiletries reported to the
Swedish medical products agency 1989–1994. Contact Dermatitis 1996; 34:359–362.
5. Dooms-Goossens A. Reducing sensitizing potential by pharmaceutical and cosmetic design. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1984; 10:547–553.
Allergy and Hypoallergenic Products
559

=== Page 577 ===
6. Pasche B, Hunziker N. Sensitization to Kathon CG in Geneva and Switzerland. Contact Dermatitis
1989; 20:115–119.
7. Dooms-Goossens AE, Debusschere KM, Gevers DM, et al. Contact dermatitis caused by airborne
agents. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989; 15:1–10.
8. Morren MA, Rodrigues R, Dooms-Goossens A, et al. Connubial contact dermatitis. Eur J Dermatol
1992; 2:219–223.
9. Dooms-Goossens A, Dupre´ K, Borghijs A, et al. Zinc ricinoleate: sensitizer in deodorants. Contact
Dermatitis 1987; 16:292–293.
10. Morren MA, Dooms-Goossens A, Delabie J, et al. Contact allergy to isothiazolinone derivatives.
Dermatologica 1992; 198:260–264.
11. Adams RM, Maibach HI. A five-year study of cosmetic reactions. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 13:
1062–1069.
12. Goossens A, Merckx L. I’Allergie de contact aux cosme´tiques. Allergie et Immunologie 1997; 29:300–303.
13. Dooms-Goossens A, Kerre S, Drieghe J, et al. Cosmetic products and their allergens. Eur J Dermatol
1992; 2:465–468.
14. Berne B, Lundin A, Enander Malmros P. Side effects of cosmetics and toiletries in relation to use: a
retrospective study in a Swedish population. Eur J Dermatol 1994; 4:189–193.
15. de Groot AC, Nater JP, van der Lende R, et al. Adverse effects of cosmetics: a retrospective study in
the general population. Int J Cosm Science 1987; 9:255–259.
16. Katsarar A, Kalogeromitros D, Armenaka M, et al. Trends in the results of patch testing to standard
allergens over the period 1984–1995. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37:245–246.
17. de Groot AC, Frosch PJ. Adverse reaction to fragrances. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 36:57–86.
18. Rastogi SC, Johansen JD, Frosch P, et al. Deodorants on the European market: quantitative chemical
analysis of 21 fragrances. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:29–35.
19. Johansen JD, Menne´ T. The fragrance mix and its constituents: a 14-year material. Contact Dermatitis
1995; 32:18–23.
20. Frosch PJ, Pilz B, Andersen KE, et al. Patch testing with fragrances: results of a multi-center study of
the European Environmental and Contact Dermatitis Research Group with 48 frequently used
constituents of perfumes. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33:333–342.
21. Larsen W, Nakayama H, Fischer T, et al. A study of new fragrance mixtures. Am J Contact Dermatitis
1998; 9:202–206.
22. Frosch PJ, Johansen JD, Menne´ T, et al. Lyral is an important sensitizer in patients sensitive
to fragrances. Br J Dermatol 1999; 141:1076–1083.
23. Frosch PJ, Johansen JD, Menne´ T, et al. Further important sensitizers in patients sensitive to
fragrances. I. Reactivity to 14 frequently used chemicals. Contact Dermatitis 2002; 47:78–85.
24. Frosch PJ, Johansen JD, Menne´ T, et al. Further important sensitizers in patients sensitive to
fragrances. II. Reactivity to essential oils. Contact Dermatitis 2002; 47:279–287.
25. Bordalo O, Pereira F, Ferreira L, et al. Patch testing with commercial perfumes (abstract). Contact
Dermatitis 2000; 42(suppl 2):15.
26. Directive 2003/15/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 February 2003 amending
Councel Directive 76/768/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to
cosmetic products. TGD-D7-Annex 3. Off J Eur Union 11.3.2003.
27. Karlberg A-T, Dooms-Goossens A. Contact allergy to oxidized d-limonene among dermatitis patients.
Contact Dermatitis 1997; 36:201–206.
28. Lepoittevin JP, Meschkat E, Huygens S, et al. Presence of resin acids in “oakmoss” patch test material:
a source of misdiagnosis. J Invest Dermatol 2000; 115:129–130.
29. Goossens A, Lepoittevin J-P. Allergie de contact aux cosme´tiques et aux composants de parfums:
aspects cliniques, chimiques et diagnostiques nouveaux. Contact allergy to cosmetics and their perfume
components: new clinical, chemical and diagnostic aspects. Revue Franc¸aise d’Allergologie et
d’Immunologie Clinique 2003; 43:294–300.
30. Goossens A, Beck M, Haneke E, et al. Cutaneous reactions to cosmetic allergens. Contact Dermatitis
1999; 40:112–113.
31. Wilkinson JD, Shaw S, Andersen KE, et al. Monitoring levels of preservative sensitivity in Europe.
A 10-year overview. (1991–2000). Contact Dermatitis 2002; 46:207–210.
32. de Groot AC, de Cock PAJJM, Coenraads PJ, et al. Methyldibromoglutaronitrile is an important
contact allergen in the Netherlands. Contact Dermatitis 1996, 34:118–120.
33. Corazza M, Mantovani L, Roveggio C, et al. Frequency of sensitization to Euxyl K400 in 889 cases.
Contact Dermatitis 1993; 28:298–299.
34. Tosti A, Vincenzi C, Trevisi F, et al. Euxyl K400: incidence of sensitization, patch test concentration
and vehicle. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33:193–195.
35. Perrenoud D, Birchner A, Hunziker T, et al. Frequency of sensitization to 13 common preservatives in
Switzerland. Contact Dermatitis 1994; 30:276–279.
560
Goossens

=== Page 578 ===
36. Jacobs MC, White IR, Rycroft RJG, et al. Patch testing with preservatives at St. John’s from 1982–1993.
Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33:247–254.
37. Verhaeghe I, Dooms-Goossens A. Multiple sources of allergic contact dermatitis from parabens.
Contact Dermatitis 1997; 36:269–270.
38. Wakelin SH, White IR. Dermatitis from chlorphenesin in a facial cosmetic. Contact Dermatitis 1997;
37:138–139.
39. Dooms-Goossens A, Scheper RJ, Andersen KE, et al. Comparative patch testing with PPD-base and
PPD-dihydrochloride: human and animal data compiled by the European Environmental Contact
Dermatitis Research Group. In: Frosch PJ, Dooms-Goossens A, Lachapelle JM, et al., eds. Current
Topics in Contact Dermatitis. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1989:281–285.
40. Frosch PJ, Burrows D, Camarasa JG, et al. Allergic reactions to a hairdressers’ series: results from
9 European centers. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 28:180–183.
41. Holness DL, Nethercott JR. Epicutaneous testing results in hairdressers. Am J Contact Dermatitis
1990; 1:224–234.
42. Liden C, Berg M, Fa¨rm G, et al. Nail varnish allergy with far-reaching consequences. Br J Dermatol
1993; 128:57–62.
43. Kanerva L, Lauerma A, Estlander T, et al. Occupational allergic contact dermatitis caused by photo-
bonded sculptured nail and a review of (meth)acrylates in nail cosmetics. Am J Contact Dermatitis
1996; 7:109–115.
44. Landa N, Aguirre A, Goday J, et al. Allergic contact dermatitis from a vasoconstrictor cream. Contact
Dermatitis 1990; 22:290–291.
45. Santucci B, Picardo M, Cristando A. Contact dermatitis to Centelase. Contact Dermatitis 1985; 13:39.
46. Stables CI, Wilkinson SM. Allergic contact dermatitis to panthenol. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:
236–237.
47. Goossens A, Merckx L. Allergic contact dermatitis from farnesol in a deodorant. Contact Dermatitis
1997; 37:179–180.
48. Gonc¸alo M, Ruas E, Figueiredo A, et al. Contact and photo-contact sensitivity to sunscreens. Contact
Dermatitis 1995; 33:278–280.
49. Berne B, Ros AM. 7 years experience of photo-patch testing with sunscreen allergens in Sweden.
Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:61–64.
50. Schauder S, Ippen H. Photoallergische und allergisches Kontaktekzem durch dibenzoylmethanver-
bindungen und andere lichtschutzfilter. Hautarzt 1988; 39:435–440.
51. Theeuwes M, Degreef H, Dooms-Goossens A. Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) and sunscreen allergy.
Am J Contact Dermatitis 1992; 3:206–207.
52. Ricci C, Vaccari S, Cavalli M, et al. Contact sensitization to sunscreens. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1997;
8:165–166.
53. Pigatto PD, Bigardi AS, Cusano F. Contact dermatitis to cocamidopropyl betaine is caused by residual
amines: relevance, clinical characteristics and review of the literature. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1995;
6:13–16.
54. Fowler JE, Fowler LM, Hunter JE. Allergy to cocamidopropyl betaine may be due amidoamine: a
patch and product use test study. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37:276–281.
55. Lorenzi S, Placucci F, Vincenzi C, et al. Contact sensitisation to cocamidopropyl-PG-dimonium
chloride phosphate in a cosmetic cream. Contact Dermatitis 1996; 34:149–150.
56. Dooms-Goossens A, Buyse L, Stals H. Maleated soybean oil, a new cosmetic allergen. Contact
Dermatitis 1995; 32:49–51.
57. Diegenant C, Constandt L, Goossens A. Allergic contact dermatitis due to 1,3-butylene glycol. Contact
Dermatitis 2000; 43:234–235.
58. Gallo R, Viglizzo G, Vecchio F, et al. Allergic contact dermatitis from pentylene glycol in an emollient
cream, with possible co-sensitization to resveratrol. Contact Dermatitis 2003; 48:176–177.
59. Linsen G, Goossens A. Allergic contact dermatitis from ethylhexylglycerin. Contact Dermatitis 2002;
47:169.
60. Goossens A, Armingaud P, Avenel-Audran M, et al. An epidemic of allergic contact dermatitis due to
epilating products. Contact Dermatitis 2002; 47:67–70.
61. Goossens A, Decraene T, Platteaux N, et al. Glucosides as unexpected allergens in cosmetics? Contact
Dermatitis 2003; 48:164–166.
62. Le Coz CJ, Meyer M-T. Contact allergy to decyl glucoside in antiseptic after body piercing. Contact
Dermatitis 2003; 48:279–280.
63. Duke D, Urioste SS, Dover JS, et al. A reaction to a red lip cosmetic tattoo. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;
39:488–490.
64. Dooms-Goossens A. Testing without a kit. In: Gum JD, ed. Handbook of Contact Dermatitis. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1995:63–74.
65. Dooms-Goossens A. Hypo-allergenic products. J Appl Cosmetol 1985; 3:153–172.
Allergy and Hypoallergenic Products
561

=== Page 579 ===
66. Draelos ZD, Rietschel RL. Hypoallergenicity and the dermatologist’s perception. J Am Acad Dermatol
1996; 35:248–251.
67. Draelos ZD. Sensitive skin: perceptions, evaluation, and treatment. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1997;
8:67–78.
68. Barker MO. Cosmetic industry. If the regulators don’t get you, your competitors will. Am J Contact
Dermatitis 1997; 8:49–51.
69. Jackson EM. Science of cosmetics. Lawyers, regulations, and cosmetic claims. Am J Contact Dermatitis
1997; 8:243–246.
70. Goossens A, Drieghe J. Computer applications in contact allergy. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:51–52.
562
Goossens

=== Page 580 ===
54
Operational Definition of a Causative
Contact Allergen—A Study with
Six Fragrance Allergens
Jurij J. Hostynek and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Contact allergic dermatitis remains a significant public health problem. Its diagnosis and
prevention is complicated by the difficulty of identifying allergens responsible for a patient’s
condition (i.e., those that have actually caused the allergic contact dermatitis). This paper
attempts to provide criteria that can be used as an operational definition of causative allergens.
Six fragrance allergens exemplify the application of these criteria. Each is discussed in a
separate paper (1–6).
Although predictive tests can identify potential allergens, it is only through clinical
diagnosis studies on patients with current contact dermatitis that truly causative allergens can
be identified. This is, however, not a simple matter and is complicated by practical difficulties
inherent to the technique of patch testing, to the physiological nature of type IV allergy, and by
other practical matters such as the available time and willingness of patients to submit to
prolonged studies.
Clinical patch testing remains a partially subjective field (7). When a clear reaction is
observed, it is not always certain that it has been due to a truly clinically –relevant allergic
response. Marks et al. suggested that more than 40% of 3000 patients with suspected allergic
contact dermatitis were, in fact, suffering from irritant or some other form of nonallergic
contact dermatitis (8). A recent study has shown that there was an association between
erythematous reactions to some allergens and irritant reactions to sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS),
which is a putative marker for hyperreactive skin, thus allowing many reactions of this type to
be classified as irritant rather than allergic in nature (9).
Apart from false-positive reactions from irritancy, there is always a possibility that other
false-positive reactions can occur from cross-reactions where patients react to substances,
which are not the primary sensitizers and which initially induced the allergic state (10).
Similarities in chemical structure or cutaneous metabolism would appear to be major factors in
cross-reactivity (11). Over 70 different cross-reacting pairs or families of fragrance ingredients
have been catalogued (12,13). Positive correlations of concomitant reactions in different pairs
of components of the fragrance mix have also been recorded in poly-reactive patients (14).
False-positive reactions can also arise from phenomena such as the “excited skin
syndrome” that occurs after a number of patches result in positive test results, which cannot be
reproduced when the patient is retested (15,16). Over 40% of such positive patch reactions are
lost on repatching (16–18). Indeed, some studies have involved phased patch testing schedules
to avoid false positives due to this syndrome.
Even when there is clear evidence that the reaction is allergic in nature, ascertaining the
clinical relevance of the patch test requires knowledge of technical aspects relating to specificity
and sensitivity issues (19). In one of the more familiar clinical correlations—nickel allergic
contact dermatitis—there is a high ratio of false-positive and false-negative reactions (20). Even
when an allergic reaction has been indicated, the chances that an experienced physician will
accurately identify the causative allergen from clinical information is about 50% mostly when
common allergens are involved, but this is reduced to 10% for less common allergens (21).
There is increasing evidence that diagnostic patch testing may also elicit true allergies, but
these allergies are not the cause of the patient’s current contact dermatitis. Lachapelle has
defined clinical relevance as “the capability of an information retrieval system to select and
retrieve data appropriate to a patient’s need” (22). In this context, Lachapelle has distinguished

=== Page 581 ===
between past (not directly related to the patient’s current problems) and current relevance and
has devised a system for distinguishing between the two. He has also defined the need to
determine the “intrinsic imputability” of a suspected allergen as the “possible (and not
necessarily exclusive) cause-effect relationship between each positive test to an allergen and the
occurrence of a given chemical event.” The approach proposed here uses some aspects of this
system. A more recent publication (23) gives strategies for determining true clinical relevance.
These require establishing the existence of past exposure and ensuring that the patient’s
exposure has indeed been responsible for the observed dermatitis. A number of suggestions are
also made for improving evidence-based diagnosis of relevance. These include running use tests
with implicated products, accounting for possible cross-reactions and a more rigorous and
detailed examination of the case in which the clinician must retrieve the pertinent historical data,
trace the responsible environmental exposure, and perform the appropriate tests.
While some allergies revealed by patch testing may pertain to past allergic clinical
events, others may pertain to allergies acquired by the patient but which have never been
clinically manifested (i.e., have never caused contact dermatitis in the patient) (24). There is
increasing experimental evidence, mainly in animal tests (25–30) but also in some older studies
on humans (31) to show that the threshold dose of elicitation varies in accordance with the
conditions of induction. When induction conditions are severe, the elicitation threshold dose is
low. When induction occurs under mild conditions, much higher exposures are required to
elicit an allergic reaction. This means that it may be possible for patients to have acquired
allergies under low exposure conditions (e.g., use of cosmetics or other consumer products
resulting in relatively mild exposures to their allergenic components), which will never be
elicited during their everyday lives as long as exposure remains low. However, these allergies
may be artificially elicited under higher exposure conditions experienced in patch testing.
These true positive reactions may not be clinically relevant and indeed may not represent a
cause for concern for the patient as they reflect an allergic state, which may never manifest
itself clinically.
Diagnostic patch tests are by necessity, purposefully designed to avoid false negatives
(i.e., to avoid missing possible causative agents), and to do this, the patch test conditions are
intentionally more severe than normal exposure conditions. We have clarified that the patch
test dose (single application) is usually higher than use test dose (32,33). This can be seen by
comparing relative doses. Taking fragrance allergens as examples, a fragrance ingredient used
at 1% in a perfume spray (the product type that produces the highest on-skin level of
fragrance), a maximum dermal loading of 26 mg/cm2 is obtained (34).a Yet the use of diagnostic
patch tests with 1% of the same ingredient in 19 mm Hill Top Chambers1 will deliver a skin
loading of 1770 mg/cm2 (35), a 68-fold increase. The use of 2  2 cm Webril1 patches, 8 mm
Finn Chambers1, and a Professional Products1 1.9  1.9 cm patch would result in 38-fold,
11-fold, and 21-fold increases, respectively. To this, we should add the (dose enhancing)
potentiating effects of occlusion [numerous publications (19,36–39) and the potentiation due to
an exceptionally long duration of the 48-hour exposure (39)]. The intentions behind this type of
exaggeration are laudable, being aimed at identifying substances to which the patient may be
allergic. However, they will not necessarily identify the substance that is primarily responsible
for the allergy from which the patient is suffering at that specific time. We return to this
particular point in the section “Were These Sufficiently Maximized”.
Defining the appropriate concentrations for patch tests balances
(i) nonirritation;
(ii) avoiding active sensitization, and
(iii) an appropriate enhancement of concentration that will identify an allergic individual.
The situation with fragrance allergens remains complex because of the relatively limited
data on which to define appropriate patch test concentrations, and until recently, the relative
difficulty of obtaining documentation that a given consumer product contains the individual
fragrance ingredient and its concentration. However, the International Fragrance Association
aThis would correspond to a fragrance ingredient present at 20% in a fragrance used at 5% in this type of
product.
564
Hostynek and Maibach

=== Page 582 ===
(40) has recently carried out a number of industry-wide surveys, which have been aimed at
determining the highest concentrations currently used in fine fragrance products (i.e., the type
of consumer products, which delivers the highest levels of fragrance in terms of concentration
and quantity per unit area). On the basis of these levels, we propose in the table (Annex)
concentrations that could be used as guides to determine the concentrations in some common
patch test systems. These would correspond approximately to the maximum exposure that
could be expected from using a consumer product when the dermatologist is confronted with a
case of allergic contact dermatitis but has no culprit product to examine.
Depending on whether a response is irritant or allergic has long been a complex
challenge. All too frequently, inadequate (nonallergic) controls are available. Excited skin
syndrome (15) provides further complexity; most clinicians do little single patch tests to verify
this possibility. Brasch (41) and Geier (9) have suggested using their reaction index/positives
ratio as a retrospective aid in defining those allergens whose positive responses might, in fact,
be irritant instead.
In the ideal, but rarely encountered, clinical situation, the causative role of an allergen
will be suggested by its presence in a consumer product that has already been identified as the
cause of the patient’s allergy. In such cases, the patch test should be conducted at a
concentration that is related to the concentration of the suspected allergen in the product.
We suggest below the criteria by which the causative role of an allergen can be attributed
to a specific case of clinical contact dermatitis. By far the more important is diagnostic patch
testing as this alone can link the substance to the case. The criteria are aimed at determining the
degree of confidence we can ascribe through diagnostic patch testing, a specific allergen’s
causal role in a specific case of allergic contact dermatitis. It is also important, however, to have
some measure of the substance’s intrinsic allergenic potency. For this reason, we are also
presenting a scheme for ascribing a degree of confidence to the results of predictive tests.
These schemes build on a previous approach of Benezra et al. (10), and in subsequent
papers; these criteria are put into practice by taking six fragrance allergens recently identified
as major fragrance allergens (42). These have been specifically chosen to span the range of
likely causality shown by the 24 allergenic substances identified in this new legislation. Two of
the substances are considered as frequently encountered allergens (geraniol and amylcinnamic
aldehyde), two are among the less frequently encountered (a-iso-methylionone and anisyl
alcohol), and two are intermediate in this regard (citronellol and linalool).
DATA OBTAINED FROM DIAGNOSTIC PATCH TESTING OF PATIENTS IN
DERMATOLOGICAL CLINICS
The following scoring system is proposed.
Is It A Primary Case Report or A General Review?
Many publications in this area are reviews or statistical studies of patch test results already
published elsewhere. While these papers perform an important function, they present a
possible source of duplicate reporting whereby the same patch test result is referred twice in
the literature. It is therefore important to distinguish between these two types of studies. A
higher degree of confidence is attributed to detailed primary studies.
Is Information Provided on the Number and Condition of the Patients?
The number of patients being examined is of importance mainly for epidemiological studies.
However when studies do not provide information on the number and nature of the test
materials to which individual patients reacted, then it is impossible to estimate the degree of
poly-reactivity and possible cross-reactions. It is also important to know if the patients suffer
from current eczema or other diseases. A lower degree of confidence is attributed when this
information is not provided.
Are the Conditions of Patch Testing Given?
This is of primary importance particularly with regard to the purity of the test material (43).
The test material should be clearly identified and degree of purity specified. The presence of
potentially more allergenic impurities (e.g., aldehydes in alcohols and autoxidation products)
Operational Definition of a Causative Contact Allergen
565

=== Page 583 ===
should also be controlled and indicated. A lower degree of confidence is attributed to results
from studies where such verifications are not reported.
Ideally, the report should give a detailed description of the patch test conditions. The
type and size of the patch, duration of occlusion, nature of the vehicle, and the concentration of
the test material are a minimum of information that is required. The bioavialability of the test
material and the dose in quantity per unit area will vary from one type patch test kit to another
(35,44). The timing of readings is also of importance.
Unless it is clear from historical evidence, it is necessary to rule out the possibility that
irritant reactions are observed. For this reason, it has been recommended to undertake a
preliminary test of at least three concentrations on control subjects (45).
A higher degree of confidence is also attributed when it is clear that the patch test
conditions have exposed the patient to levels of the allergen that are not disproportionately
high with regard to the levels of exposure, which were suspected to have led to the patient’s
condition. Although there is no clear test to determine whether a positive patch test reaction
has revealed the cause of the allergy or some latent subclinical allergy, information on the
conditions of patch testing provides valuable information in making a judgment with any
degree of confidence in this regard.
Are the Results Reported in Sufficient Detail?
The intensity of positive reactions should be recorded. Numerous authors have expressed
concern that a significant proportion of patch test reactions may be irritant in nature. This is
particularly the case with weakly positive (1þ) scores (46), and it has been proposed that these
scores should be handled separately (47). Studies comparing True Test TM and Finn Chambers
showed that the fragrance mix gave about 47% irritant and questionable reactions with the
former and about 45% with the latter, with a high degree of discordance between the two
systems. In other large studies (48,49), about 60% to 70% of the reactions recorded were 1þ,
and it was speculated that up to 40% were irritant in nature (48). Further, the fact that the skin
is not viewed for 24 hours following application of the patch makes it almost impossible to
distinguish between quick-developing irritation and delayed contact hypersensitivity.
Scores should be given in a way that allows comparison of reactions experienced by a
given patient to different test materials. A higher degree of confidence is attributed to results
from studies where this information is provided.
Is It Possible to Ascertain if Patients had Reacted to Other Materials?
Concomitant reactions cloud the issue of causality. Although it is possible that a particular case
of allergic contact dermatitis has been caused by several allergens, other explanations for
multiple reactions to different suspect allergens will need to be ruled out. For this reason, it is
important to know the other substances, which produced positive patch test reactions in each
patient.
Can We Rule Out Cross-Reactions?
A lower degree of confidence is attributed to results from studies where uncertainty arises in
this regard. When positive reactions occur to different substances in the same patient, and
these substances have similar chemical structures, the possibility arises that some of these
patch test reactions are in fact false indicators of the true cause of the case of contact allergic
dermatitis.
Can We Rule Out “Excited Skin”?
There is also the possibility that false-positive reactions appear because of the excited skin
syndrome (15–19). The likelihood of this occurrence can be reduced by carrying out patch tests
in a time-phased manner so that the number of patches is minimized. A higher degree of
confidence is allocated to studies that have taken such precautions or other measures to ensure
that some of the observed reactions are not due to artifacts of this type.
Has the Substance Been Tested in Usage Tests?
Although some uncertainties in these techniques need to be resolved (50), the use of repeat
open applied tests (ROATs) and provocative use tests (PUTs) can add important extra
evidence of the causative role as they confirm under milder conditions than patch testing the
566
Hostynek and Maibach

=== Page 584 ===
allergenic role of the substance. If these can be performed on suspected sources of exposure to
the patient (e.g., consumer products containing the substance), an even higher degree of
confidence is attained (see following section). This is a key to the scheme proposed by
Lachapelle (22) for assigning intrinsic imputability.
Has the Substance and the Allergy Been Linked to a Specific Consumer Product or
Exposure Situation?
This is perhaps the gold standard for establishing the causal culpability of a suspect. Ideally,
this would go further than simply gathering information of the possible causative products
[the third criteria of Lachapelle (22)] and include carrying out patch tests on fractions of the(se)
causative product(s) until the culpable allergens have been identified by producing reactions
to the exclusion of all other components. A number of studies producing convincing results of
this type have been published [e.g., Handley and Burrows (51)]. However in such cases, the
highest degree of confidence can only be ascribed when it is clear that the patch test conditions
have exposed the patient to levels of the allergen, which are not disproportionately high with
regard to the levels of exposure, which were suspected to have led to the patient’s condition.
The following scoring system has been used.
5: meets all criteria
4: meets all criteria but number of cases is marginal
3: meets criteria but some parameters questionable
2: evidence does not unambiguously indicate causative role of the test substance
1: fails several criteria, results are not considered to be reliable
0: fails all criteria/not primary report in literature of cases cited
DATA OBTAINED FROM PREDICTIVE TESTS IN ANIMALS AND HUMAN
VOLUNTEERS
The first part of this analysis examines the likelihood that the designated substance shows an
inherent potential to sensitize. This type of information is best obtained from predictive tests,
although it should be cautioned that these data only provide information on a substance’s
intrinsic hazard. The conditions of exposure to the general public may be sufficiently high in
some instances to produce reactions in substances, which fail to show any significant
sensitization hazard (52). For this reason, the apparent absence of a sensitization potential from
predictive tests will not rule out the likelihood that a substance will not cause reactions in
sufficiently exposed populations. Given this proviso, we suggest that the degree of confidence
should be attributed to predictive tests according to the following criteria.
Was the Test Material Clearly Identified?
The test material should be clearly identified, and the degree of purity should be specified. The
presence of potentially more allergenic impurities (e.g., aldehydic impurities in alcohols and
autoxidation products) should also be controlled. A lower degree of confidence is attributed to
results from studies where such verifications are not reported.
The Type of Test/Type of Test Subjects
The type of test and nature of the test subjects should be clearly specified. If these are human
subjects, their dermatological status should have been verified by a dermatologist prior to and,
if necessary, during the course of the study. It is also accepted that some types of test are more
sensitive than others. Adjuvant tests in guinea pigs have long been regarded as more sensitive
than non-adjuvant methods. Some tests have been less well validated than others. A lower
degree of confidence is attributed to results from studies that are not as sensitive as others.
Were Details of Test Conditions Provided?
Information on the exact protocols should be provided to ensure that the most sensitive
methodology has been applied. The test concentration (and the skin loading as expressed in
quantity per unit area) should be neat to the limit of irritation. The choice of the vehicle(s) and
type of patches can also have an influence on the sensitivity of the test. A lower degree of
confidence is attributed to results from studies where this information is not reported or
Operational Definition of a Causative Contact Allergen
567

=== Page 585 ===
deemed less than optimal. Officially approved test protocols should be used for those methods
that have been codified in this way [e.g., by Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), 1981 as amended (53)]. There is also accumulating evidence to show
that occlusion and ethanol may in fact produce false positives in human studies. This should
also be taken into account.
Were These Sufficiently Maximized?
A lower degree of confidence is attributed to results from studies that are deemed to be less
than optimally maximized to avoid false-negative results.
Were There Adequate Controls?
These are necessary to ensure that irritancy is not occurring during induction. Tests involving a
challenge phase should include challenges to naive subjects to control irritancy. Where
ethically possible, the laboratory performing these studies should carry out regular positive
control studies using standard borderline allergens. A lower degree of confidence is attributed
to results from studies where these controls are not reported to have been used or where they
have also produced reactions.
Was the Number of Test Subjects Sufficient?
There are international standards requiring the minimum number of animals to be used in
some tests [OECD, 1981 as amended (53)]. Tests on human subjects should generally involve
more than these because of the inherent and environmental variability of the test subjects (54),
and ideally at least 200 should be used. A lower degree of confidence is attributed to results
from studies in which an insufficient number of test subjects were used.
Were the Results Presented in Sufficient Detail?
The intensity of positive reactions should be recorded. Scores should also be followed for
individual test subjects to ensure that, for instance, those reacting at one challenge are the same
as those who react at subsequent challenges. A lower degree of confidence is attributed to
results from studies where this information is not provided.
SCORING
The following scoring system is used:
5: meets all criteria
4: meets all criteria but number of positives is marginal
3: meets criteria but some parameters questionable (e.g., insufficient data provided or test
not fully maximized)
2: controls apparently absent or small number of test subjects
1: fails several criteria, results are not considered to be reliable
0: fails all criteria
CONCLUSIONS OF THE STUDIES ON SIX FRAGRANCE ALLERGENS
The accompanying papers on amylcinnamic aldehyde, anisyl alcohol, citronellol, geraniol,
linalool, and a-iso-methylionone (1–6) show that when the underlying clinical and experi-
mental data are analyzed according to the criteria outlined above, a clear cause-effect
relationship has infrequently or rarely been established and would not necessarily be expected
on the basis of the generally weak sensitizing potential of these substances coupled with
reasonably low exposure conditions. This is not to say that some of these substances are
frequent inducers of type IV allergy in members of the public. It remains to be seen however,
how often such allergy, once established, is responsible for any of the cases of allergic contact
dermatitis commonly ascribed to these substances.
Schnuch and others have commented extensively on the wisdom and criteria for
definition of what is a chemical allergen in man. References (55–57) provide a state of the
science.
568
Hostynek and Maibach

=== Page 586 ===
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Dr. Peter Cadby reviewed the manuscript and greatly added to the conclusions.
REFERENCES
1. Hostynek JJ, Maibach HI. Is there evidence that anisyl alcohol causes allergic contact dermatitis? Exog
Dermatol 2003; 2:230–233.
2. Hostynek JJ, Maibach HI. Is there evidence that amylcinnamic aldehyde causes allergic contact
dermatitis? Exog Dermatol 2004; 3:35–46.
3. Hostynek JJ, Maibach HI. Sensitization potential of citronellol. Exog Dermatol 2004; 3:307–312.
4. Hostynek JJ, Maibach HI. Is there evidence that geraniol causes allergic contact dermatitis? Exog
Dermatol 2004; 3:318–331.
5. Hostynek JJ, Maibach HI. Is there evidence that linalool causes allergic contact dermatitis? Exog
Dermatol 2003; 2:223–229.
6. Hostynek JJ, Maibach HI. Is there evidence that alpha-iso-methylionone causes allergic contact
dermatitis? Exog Dermatol 2004; 3:121–125.
7. Storrs FJ. Patch testing technique. Reading patch tests: some pitfalls of patch testing. Am J Contact
Dermatitis 1994; 6:170–172.
8. Marks JG, Belsito DV, Deleo VA, et al. North American contact dermatitis group patch test results for
detection of delayed hypersensitivity to topical allergens. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38:911–918.
9. Geier J, Uter W, Pirker C, et al. Patch testing with the irritant sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) is useful for
interpreting weak reactions to contact allergens as allergic or irritant. Contact Dermatitis 2003; 48:99–107.
10. Benezra C, Sigman CC, Perry LR, et al. A systemic search for structure-activity relationships of skin
contact sensitizers: methodology. J Invest Dermatol 1985; 85:351–356.
11. Smith CK, Hotchkiss SAM. Allergic Contact Dermatitis, Chemical and Metabolic Mechanisms.
London: Taylor & Francis, 2001.
12. Nater JP, de Groot AC. Unwanted Effects of Cosmetics and Drugs used in Dermatology. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 1983:16–23.
13. de Groot AC, Weyland JW, Nater JP. Unwanted Effects of Cosmetics and Drugs used in Dermatology.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1983:66–135.
14. Johansen JD, Menne´ T. The fragrance mix and its constituents: a 14-year material. Contact Dermatitis
1995; 32:18–23.
15. Maibach HI. The excited skin syndrome. In: Ring J, Burg G, eds. New Trends in Allergy. Springer
Verlag, 1981:208–221.
16. Mitchell J, Maibach HI. Managing the excited skin syndrome: patch testing hyperirritable skin.
Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37:193–199.
17. Mitchell J, Maibach H. Allergic contact dermatitis from phenoxybenzamine hydrochloride. Contact
Dermatitis 1975; 1:363–366.
18. Bruynzeel DP, van Ketel WG, von Blomberg-van der Flier, et al. Angry back or the excited skin
syndrome: a prospective study. J Am Acad Derm 1983; 8:392–397.
19. Ale SI, Maibach HI. Clinical relevance in allergic contact dermatitis. Dermatosen 1995; 43:119–121.
20. Kiefer M. Nickel sensitivity: relationship between history and patch test reaction. Contact Dermatitis
1979; 5:398–401.
21. Fischer TI, Hansen J, Krielga¨rd B, et al. The science of patch test standardization. Immunol Allergy
Clin 1989; 9:417–434.
22. Lachapelle J-M, Maibach HI. Patch testing and prick testing. Berlin: Springer, 2003:121–130.
23. Boukhman MP, Maibach HI. Thresholds in contact sensitization: immunologic mechanisms and
experimental evidence in humans—an overview. Food Chem Toxicol 2001; 39:1125–1134.
24. Chan PK, Baldwin RC, Parsons RD, et al. Kathon biocide: manifestation of delayed contact dermatitis
in guinea pigs is dependent on the concentration for induction and challenge. J Invest Dermatol 1983;
81:409–411.
25. Jayjock MA, Lewis PG. Low-applied-dose extrapolation of induction and elicitation of contact allergy
in the evaluation and management of sensitization risk from kathon CG isothiazolone in products.
Am J Contact Dermatitis 1992; 3(2):86–91.
26. Nakamura Y, Higaki T, Kato H, et al. A quantitative comparison of induction and challenge
concentrations inducing a 50% positive response in three skin sensitization tests; the guinea pig
maximization test, adjuvant and patch test and Buehler test. J Toxicol Sci 1999; 24(2):123–131.
27. Yamano T, Shimizu M, Noda T. Relative elicitation potencies of seven chemical allergens in the
guinea pig maximization iest. J Health Sci 2001; 47(2):123–128.
28. van Och FMM, Vandebriel RJ, Prinsen MK, et al. Comparison of dose-responses of contact allergens
using the guinea pig maximization test and the local lymph node assay. Toxicology 2001; 167:207–215.
Operational Definition of a Causative Contact Allergen
569

=== Page 587 ===
29. Scott AE, Kashon ML, Yucesoy B, et al. Insights into the quantitative relationship between
sensitization and challenge for allergic contact dermatitis reactions. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2002;
183:66–70.
30. Friedmann PS, Moss C. Quantification of contact hypersensitivity in man. In: Maibach HI, Lowe N,
eds. Models in Dermatology. Vol. 2. Basel: Karger, 1985:275–283.
31. Andersen KE, Johansen JD, Bruze M, et al. The time-dose-response relationship for elicitation of
contact dermatitis in isoeugenol allergic individuals. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2001; 170:166–171.
32. Johansen JD, Frosch PJ, Svedman C, et al. Hydroxyisohexyl 3-cyclohexene carboxaldehyde—known
as Lyral. Quantitative aspects and risk assessment of an important fragrance allergen. Contact
Dermatitis 2003; 48:310–316.
33. Gerberick GF, Robinson MK, Felter SP, et al. Understanding fragrance allergy using an exposure-
based risk assessment approach. Contact Dermatitis 2001; 45:333–340.
34. Robinson MK, Gerberick GF, Ryan CA, et al. The importance of exposure estimation in the assessment
of skin sensitization risk. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 42(5):251–259.
35. Calvin G, Menne´ T. Concentration threshold of non-occluded nickel exposure in nickel-sensitive
individuals and controls with and without surfactant. Contact Dermatitis 1993; 29:180–184.
36. Kraus AL, Altringer LA, Allgood GS. Allergic contact dermatitis from propyl gallate: a dose response
comparison using various application methods". Contact Dermatitis 1990; 22:132–136.
37. Funk JO, Maibach HI. Propylene glycol dermatitis: re-evaluation of an old problem. Contact
Dermatitis 1994; 31:236–241.
38. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Skin occlusion and irritant and allergic contact dermatitis: an overview. Contact
Dermatitis 2001; 44:201–206.
39. McFadden JP, Wakelin SH, Holloway DB. et al. The effect of patch duration on the elicitation of para-
phenylenediamine contact allergy. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 39:79–81.
40. IFRA. Private communication from the International Fragrance Association, 2003.
41. Brasch J, Henseler T. The reaction index: a parameter to assess the quality of patch test preparations.
Contact Dermatitis 1992; 27:203–204.
42. Scientific Committee on Cosmetic Products and other Non-Food Products intended for consumers
(SCCNFP). Opinion concerning fragrance allergy in consumers. A review of the problem. Analysis of
the need for appropriate consumer information and identification of consumer allergens. Adopted by
the SCCNFP during the plenary session of 8 December, 1999.
43. Fregert S. Patch testing with isolated and identified substances in products: basis for prevention. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1989; 21:857–860.
44. Fischer T, Maibach HI. Improved, but not perfect, patch testing. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1990; 1:73–90.
45. Fisher AA. Perfume Dermatitis Part I. General considerations and testing procedures. Cutis 1980;
26:458–477.
46. Lachapelle J-M, Bruynzeel DP, Ducombs G, et al. European Multicenter Study of the TRUE test.
Contact Dermatitis 1988; 19:91–97.
47. Schnuch A, Geier J, Uter W, et al. National rates and regional differences in sensitization to allergens
of the standard series. Population adjusted frequencies of sensitization (PAFS) in 40.000 patients from
a multicenter study (IVDK). Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37:200–209.
48. Uter W, Schnuch A, Geier J, et al. Epidemiology of contact dermatitis. The information network of
departments of dermatology (IVDK) in Germany. Eur J Dermatol 1998; 1:36–40.
49. Lachapelle J-M. A proposed relevance scoring system for positive allergic patch test reactions:
practical implications and limitations. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 36:39–43.
50. Nakada T, Hostynek JJ, Miabach HI. Use tests: ROAT (repeated open application test)/PUT
(provocative use test): an overview. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 43:1–2.
51. Handley J, Burrows D. Allergic contact dermatitis from the synthetic fragrances Lyral and acetyl
cedrene in separate underarm deodorants preparations. Contact Dermatitis 1994; 31:288–290.
52. Menne´ T, Wahlberg JE, on behalf of the European environmental and contact dermatitis group. Risk
assessment failures of chemicals commonly used in consumer products. Contact Dermatitis 2002;
46:189–190.
53. OECD. OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals. Paris: OECD, 1981 as amended. Available at
http://www.oecd.org/oecd/pages/home/displaygeneral/0,3380,EN-document-524-nodirectorate-
no-24-5647-8,00.html.
54. Henderson CR, Riley EC. Certain statistical considerations with patch testing. J Investig Dermatol
1948; 6:227–232.
55. Marrakchi S, Maibach HI. What is occupational contact dermatitis? Dermatol Clin: Occupational
Dermatoses 1994; 12(3):477–483.
56. Ale SI, Maibach HI. Operational definition of occupation allergic contact dermatitis. In: Kanerva L,
Elsner P, Wahlberg JE, Maibach JI, eds. Handbook of Occupational Dermatology. Berlin: Springer,
Chapter 41, 2000:344–351.
57. Schnuch A, Lessmann H, Schulz K-H, et al. When should a substance be designated as sensitizing for
the skin (“Sh”) or for the airways (“Sa”)? Hum Exp Toxicol 2002; 21:439–444.
570
Hostynek and Maibach

=== Page 588 ===
ANNEX: PATCH TEST CONCENTRATIONS THAT CORRESPOND TO THOSE
EXPERIENCED IN MAXIMUM CONSUMER EXPOSURE
Maximum exposure
from cosmetics
Equivalent concentrations in standard patch test kitsa
Test material
Concentrationb
Quantity/
unit areac
Finn
Chambers1
(8 mm)
Hill Top
Chambers1
(19 mm)
Professional
Products1
(1.9 
1.9 cm)
Webril1
(2  2 cm)
Amylcinnamique
aldehyde
0.89%
23 mg/cm2
0.08%
0.013%
0.04%
0.023%
Anisyl alcohol
0.57%
15 mg/cm2
0.05%
0.008%
0.03%
0.015%
Citronellol
0.70%
18 mg/cm2
0.06%
0.01%
0.03%
0.018%
Geraniol
0.62%
16 mg/cm2
0.05%
0.009%
0.03%
0.06%
Linalool
0.86%
22 mg/cm2
0.075%
0.013%
0.04%
0.022%
a-iso-
methylionone
0.74%
19 mg/cm2
0.064%
0.011%
0.035%
0.019%
aDoes not take account of additional effects of occlusion and 48-hour duration of patch tests. Based on data from
Robinson et al. (34)
bData used by RIFM from IFRA surveys. Assumes 20% of fragrance in the cosmetic (fine fragrance product).
cFrom Gerberick et al. (33). Spray-on fragrance product delivers a maximum of 2.6 mg product/cm2.
. Finn Chambers1 (8 mm): 30 mg/cm2, Hill Top Chambers1 (19 mm) 177 mg/cm2, Professional Products1 Patch
(1.9  1.9 cm): 55.4 mg/cm2, Webril Patch1 (2  2 cm): 100 mg/cm2.
Abbreviation: IFRA, international fragrance association.
Operational Definition of a Causative Contact Allergen
571

=== Page 590 ===
55
Anti-Itch Testing: Antipruritics
Heidi P. Chan, Hongbo Zhai, and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Itching, or pruritus, is an unpleasant sensation that provokes a desire to scratch. Chemical,
mechanical, thermal, and electrical stimuli can elicit itch (1–5). Mediators of itch, presumably,
directly act on nerve fibers or lead to a nerve stimulation cascade whose final common
pathway is interpreted in the central nervous system as itching (2–6). Putative receptors for
itching are C-fibers with exceptionally low conduction velocities and insensitivity to
mechanical stimuli (4–6). Histamine, the prototypical chemical mediator of itch, which is
released during mast cell degranulation and mediates its effects in the skin via H1 receptor
(3,5), is the best-known experimental pruritogen (2,3,5,7). Other pruritogens such as compound
48/80 (8,9), substance P (10,11), and serotonin (12) have been studied.
Antipruritics may alleviate or diminish itching sensation. Topical antipruritics such as
antihistamines, anesthetics, capsaicin, corticosteroids, and cooling agents are extensively used
(8–10). To define antipruritic effects, testing methodologies have been developed (11–13).
However, the clinical effects of anti-itch vary, and sometimes it is difficult to compare efficacy
between antipruritics. One reason may be inadequate biometrics, as itch is a subjective
symptom and to measure its severity is a challenge; its magnitude (intensity) can be only
estimated from reports of patients or volunteers. Methodologies have been adopted to evaluate
antipruritics that may aid future development of anti-itch products.
This chapter focuses on the evaluation of topical antipruritics; and, further reviews recent
investigations involving thermal stimuli-modifying itch (14–16), electronic devices for measure-
ment (8,9,17) as well as alleviation of itch (18), newly found use of known drugs (11,19),
questionnaires for assessment of pruritus in atopic and uremic patients (20,21), and possible
models for developing new antipruritics (10,11,17).
METHODOLOGIES
Histamine-Induced Itch Human Model
Rhoades et al. (22) examined the inhibition of histamine-induced pruritus by three
antihistaminic drugs using a double-blind crossover study on 28 human subjects. These
included: diphenhydramine HCl, cyproheptadine, hydroxyzine HCl, and a lactose placebo in
identical capsules. All subjects were given intradermal injections of increasing doses of
aqueous histamine phosphate in the volar aspect of the forearm to establish their individual
threshold levels at which itching occurred. Following the establishment of a baseline, the
subjects received two doses of one of the three antihistamines or placebo on four test periods
with a one-week interval between test days. Results revealed a fivefold increase above baseline
of the histamine dose required to produce pruritus following both cyproheptadine and
placebo. This compared to a 10-fold increase following diphenhydramine and a 750-fold
increase following hydroxyzine HCl.
Yosipovitch et al. (14,15,23–26) performed human studies to evaluate the antipruritics
with this histamine injection, as well as histamine-iontophoresis-induced itch models in man.
They also utilized the visual analog scale (VAS) to measure the itch magnitude (intensity).
One study compared the effect of antipruritics of a high-potency corticosteroid, clobetasol
propionate (CP) ointment versus its placebo in a double-blind manner on 16 healthy
volunteers. Additionally, they evaluated the affect of CP and its placebo to thermal sensation
and pain (23). They demonstrated that the CP had rapidly decreased histamine-induced itch,
but did not alter warmth sensation and thermal pain thresholds. Another study determined

=== Page 591 ===
the effect of menthol and its vehicle (alcohol) on thermal sensations, pain, and histamine-
induced experimental itch with 18 human subjects (24). Menthol showed a subjective cooling
effect lasting up to 70 minutes in 12 of 18 subjects; however, it did not affect the cold and heat
threshold, nor did it affect cold and heat pain threshold. Alcohol produced an immediate
cold sensation lasting up to 5 minutes in 4 of 18 subjects and lowered the sensitivity of
cold sensation threshold ( p < 0.05). Histamine injection did not change thermal and pain
thresholds. Menthol did not alleviate histamine-induced itch magnitude, or its duration. They
suggested that menthol fulfills the definition of a counterirritant, but does not affect histamine-
induced itch, nor does it affect pain sensation.
Later, they examined the effect of topical aspirin and its model vehicle dichloromethane
on histamine-induced itch in 16 human subjects (25). Aspirin significantly reduced itch
duration ( p ¼ 0.001) and decreased itch magnitude ( p < 0.04). Aspirin and vehicle application
did not affect thermal and pain thresholds during histamine-induced itch. Further, they tested
the antipruritics effect and thermal sensation of a local anesthetic, 1% pramoxine, and its
vehicle control in 15 human subjects (26); pramoxine significantly reduced both the magnitude
and duration of histamine-induced itch. The pramoxine also reduced the cold pain threshold
but did not affect warm sensation or heat pain threshold.
Recently, they investigated the effect of thermal modulation in histamine-induced itch
(14,15). They first investigated the effect of thermal stimuli and distal scratching on skin blood
flow and histamine-induced itch in 21 healthy volunteers (14). Thermal stimuli included 418C,
158C, and 498C while scratching was performed using a 7-inch cytology brush. Assessment of
itch was done psychophysically using computerized visual analog scale (COVAS, Medoc,
Ramat Ishai, Israel), and mapping of skin blood flow was done utilizing a PIM II laser
Doppler perfusion imager (LDPI) at baseline, in the different thermal stimuli, after histamine
iontophoresis treatment, and after scratching. They found that scratching significantly
( p ¼ 0.01) reduced skin blood flow and itch; noxious heat significantly increased basal skin
( p  0.001), but was not significant in reducing blood flow and itch intensity; noxious cold and
cooling significantly ( p ¼ 0.007) reduced itch intensity but not in histamine-induced skin blood
flow; and subnoxious warming neither had an affect with both itch intensity nor skin blood
flow. They suggest that heat pain and scratching may inhibit itch through a neurogenic
mechanism that also affects blood flow.
The other study involved 21 healthy human volunteers and assessed whether (i) the
sensory perception of itch is attenuated by interactions between thermal and mechanical
stimuli, as well as afferent information related to itch; and (ii) if interindividual differences in
itch perception were related to interindividual differences in pain sensitivity (15). They used a
100-mm COVAS on histamine-iontophoresis applied on the flexor forearms. After 30 seconds,
thermal stimuli [noxious cold (28C), innocuous cool (158C), innocuous warmth (418C), noxious
heat (498C)] were delivered repetitively in a random order by a 16  16 mm Peltier device at
3 cm distal to the sight of histamine-iontophoresis. Cytology brush was used to simulate
scratching at a constant pressure. Results revealed that noxious heat, noxious cold, and
scratching significantly ( p < 0.004, p < 0.001, p < 0.0001, respectively) reduced itch via spinal
or supraspinal mechanism. A possible explanation favoring supraspinal mechanism is that
these three stimuli were sufficient to have called attention from the prefrontal cortex, thus
diverting attention away from the itch. The study revealed significant interindividual
differences in itch sensitivity to histamine. On the other hand, interindividual differences in
itch sensitivity were unrelated to interindividual differences pain sensitivity.
Pfab et al. also used thermal modulation for histamine-induced itch (16). They evaluated
the effect of short-term alternating temperature modulation in nine healthy human volunteers
and developed a possible methodology for imaging studies using functional magnetic resonance
imaging. Histamine induction was done using the skin prick model (27) to the volar aspect of the
dominant right forearm of each subject. Skin temperature was modulated, intensity of itch was
determined, and the Eppendorf Itch Questionnaire was done by all subjects at the end of the
study. Results revealed the mean itch intensity was significantly ( p < 0.001) higher in the 258C
temperature compared with that in 358C temperature. Alternating changes in mean itch
perception between 258C and 358C were notably reproducible. And, the mean descriptive and
emotional ratings were also significantly ( p < 0.01) higher in the 258C temperature compared
with that in 358C temperature as well. They concluded that a decrease in short-term moderate
temperature enhances histamine-induced itch, providing the possibility of further and more
574
Chan et al.

=== Page 592 ===
detailed itch investigation by methods usually used for nociception such as functional magnetic
resonance imaging.
Weisshaar et al. (28) evaluated the effect of topical capsaicin on the cutaneous reactions
and itching to histamine in atopic eczema (AE) patients and healthy human subjects. Capsaicin
0.05% was applied three times daily over a five-day period to the same infrascapular region.
The effects of pretreatment upon the pruritogenic and wheal and flare reactions to subsequent
histamine iontophoresis were evaluated on the following day. In control subjects, but not in AE
patients, capsaicin pretreatment significantly reduced the flare area. Compared with control
subjects, AE patients showed a lack of alloknesis (itchy skin) or significantly smaller areas of
alloknesis in pretreated and nonpretreated skin. In control subjects, capsaicin pretreatment
significantly reduced itch sensations compared with nonpretreated skin, whereas in AE
patients no differences were seen. Itch sensations in capsaicin-pretreated skin were
significantly lower in control subjects than in AE patients. They concluded that capsaicin
effectively suppresses histamine-induced itching in healthy skin but has less effect in AE. The
diminished itch sensations and the absence of alloknesis in atopic individuals indicate that
histamine is not the key factor in itching in AE.
Thomsen et al. (29) conducted a randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled
human study to determine the antipruritic ability of topical aspirin in inflamed skin. In 24
nonatopic volunteers, an inflammatory skin reaction was induced in forearm skin at five sites
by sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) contained in Finn Chambers. Aspirin 10%, aspirin 1%,
mepyramine 5%, and vehicle were applied to the inflamed and corresponding noninflamed
areas 20 minutes before itch induction with intradermal histamine injection. No difference in
itch intensities was found after application of aspirin, mepyramine and vehicle, but more itch
was induced in aspirin and mepyramine pretreated sites in inflamed skin compared with
normal skin ( p < 0.05). In normal skin, flare areas were smaller after pretreatment with aspirin
10% ( p < 0.05) and mepyramine ( p < 0.001), as were wheal areas after mepyramine ( p < 0.01),
compared with vehicle pretreatments. In inflamed skin, flare areas were smaller after
pretreatment with aspirin 10% ( p < 0.01) and mepyramine ( p < 0.001), as were wheal areas
after aspirin 10% ( p < 0.01), aspirin 1% ( p < 0.05), and mepyramine ( p < 0.001). They
concluded that despite a significant skin penetration as measured by the influence on wheal
and flare reactions, topically applied aspirin did not decrease histamine-induced itch in the
model used.
Zhai et al. (30) evaluated the antipruritic effect of hydrocortisone (1% and 2.5%) and its
vehicle control on histamine-induced itch and sensory effects in 18 human subjects. In
comparison with placebo, 2.5% hydrocortisone significantly ( p = 0.03) reduced itch duration
from 12.6  11.0 to 8.6  8.2 minutes (the reducing rate was 32%) as well as itch magnitude (at
minutes 3, 6, 7, and overall). Placebo, 1% and 2.5% hydrocortisone significantly altered ( p < 0.05)
the cold sensation threshold. No treatment altered cold or heat pain thresholds. They
suggested that topical application of 2.5% hydrocortisone might be significantly beneficial for
the treatment of histamine-induced itch.
They further ascertained the antipruritic effects of topical strontium salts with the
histamine-induced-itch model on eight human subjects (31). Strontium nitrate, in comparison
with its vehicle control, significantly shortened itch duration from 28.1  5.4 to 18.5  4.2
minutes ( p < 0.01) and reduced itch magnitude at time points 12 to 20 minutes and overall ( p
< 0.05). They concluded that strontium nitrate may act as a topical antipruritic agent in
reducing histamine-mediated itch. Furthermore, they utilized this histamine-induced itch
human model to screen and to compare the efficacy of a group of topical antipruritics on
10 individuals who were responsive to histamine-induced itch sensation (32). The pramoxine-
containing cream (formulation D) significantly ( p < 0.05) decreased itch magnitude (within a
20-minute test period), from 2.6  2.1 to 2.2  2.1 cm when compared with its vehicle control; it
also significantly ( p < 0.05) shortened itch duration (15.0  7.4 minutes) in comparison with its
vehicle control (20.3  7.0 minutes). Of all the formulations tested, pramoxine-containing
cream was the most effective antipruritic in decreasing histamine-induced itch.
Kesting et al. established a reliable model that objectively demonstrates the effectiveness
of ear electro-acupuncture by reducing alloknesis areas in experimentally induced itch (18).
Thirty-two human healthy volunteers underwent two experiments, both their volar forearms
treated with histamine iontophoresis. In the first experiment, 16 were administered with
electrical ear acupuncture on the left ear, and the other half, the right ear. Alloknesis were
Anti-Itch Testing
575

=== Page 593 ===
measured at 5 and 10 minutes posthistamine iontophoresis treatments. In the second
experiment, none of them received acupuncture, serving as control. Results revealed after the
5th and 10th minute, the alloknesis areas in the ipsilateral sites, treated with acupuncture, were
significantly smaller ( p < 0.05) than the contralateral untreated sites. And, the contralateral
sites of the first experiment compared with the results of the second experiment showed
increasing areas of alloknesis in both the 5th and 10th minute, and were not statistically
significant in terms of the size of the increasing alloknesis areas.
Scratch Behavior Measurement
Tohda et al. (33) studied the effect of Byakko-ka-ninjin-to (BN), which is composed of
gypsum, the root of anemarrhena, ginseng, licorice, and rice on the inhibition of itch using
naive/challenged (NC) mouse model of atopic dermatitis (AD). BN (200 mg/kg, p.o.)
significantly inhibited the scratching frequency in NC mice, and decreased the skin
temperature by 1.978C.
Electronic Devices for Accurate Measurement of Itch
Orito et al. developed a model for assessing the duration of scratch behavior in mice by
evaluating the time course changes in the distance between the animal’s hind limbs and the
back of the neck. (8) Ten micrograms (*10 mL) intradermally administered compound 48/80
was used to induce itch to the backs of ICR mice, and their scratch behavior was recorded on
digital videotape, as well as the distance between the back and the hind limb (hind limbs were
color coded) was measured continuously using an image analysis system (SCLABA system,
Noveltec, Kobe, Japan). Results for “true” scratching behavior revealed no significant difference
among the three thresholds ( p = 0.1); while the results for duration of scratching recorded
during the observation period increased significantly ( p < 0.001) as the threshold lengthened.
This study suggests that the SCLABA system is a good tool for studying factors which may
cause itch, and also for evaluation of efficacy of a new antipruritic drug using experimental
animals such as NC/Nga mice, a representative model of AD.
Inagi et al. evaluated and characterized scratching behavior using their new apparatus,
MicroAct in ICR and BALB/c mice (9). Inductions of scratching behavior were done by:
(i) intradermally injecting 20 mL of compound 48/80 and 20 mL of physiologic saline in two sets
of both ICR and BALB/c mice, the other set served as control; and (ii) intradermal
administration of 20 mL of appropriately diluted anti-dinitrophenyl (anti-DNP) monoclonal IgE
to induce passive cutaneous anaphylaxis (PCA); and (iii) to induce contact sensitivity reaction,
nine applications of 0.15% of DNCB diluted in acetone were done on the backs of BALB/c
mice. Frequency of scratching events (3 consecutive scratch behavior or beats), total
scratching time, and total number of beats (scratch behavior) detected by MicroAct were the
parameters used. Results revealed that MicroAct’s tally were comparable with the observer’s
tally. The frequency of scratching events and total scratching time increased in a dose-
dependent manner for both the ICR and BALB/c mice. In the PCA of the ICR mice, the three
parameters increased, though not significantly. There was a significant ( p < 0.001) increase in
the three parameters in the induced contact sensitivity in the BALB/c mice.
Benjamin et al. developed a practical method for evaluating scratch behavior by use of a
portable digital limb-worn accelerometers suitable for children and adults, in seven atopic
children (aged 2–9 years), and seven children (aged 5–7 years) without atopy, utilizing a night
video-recording with infrared light as the gold standard (17). Parameters of measuring
accelerometer readings were epoch (unit of time assayed) equivalent to two seconds and
“burst analysis” (successions of 1 epoch); while for the night video recording were observed as
sleeping, scratching, restless movements, and movements under covers–which were clearly
defined operationally in the experiment. Results from night video recording revealed a
statistically significant ( p < 0.01) 46-minute less sleep and a greater “scatter” of readings in
atopic patients compared with the control group; while results from the accelerometer
readings were significantly ( p < 0.01) clear and consistent, and, though not significant, arm
movements resulted higher than lower limbs. Accelerometer scores were highly correlated
with the video scores (< 0.01), for scratching, restlessness, and sleeping time.
576
Chan et al.

=== Page 594 ===
Others
These include contact allergic dermatitis model (poison ivy), contact irritant dermatitis
induced by SLS, etc. (34–36).
Newly Found Use of Known Drugs
Substance P-induced itch was used by Liebel et al. and found that sertaconazole nitrate
inhibited contact hypersensitivity and scratching responses in a murine model of pruritus (11).
Fifty microliter (50 mL) of 300 mg of substance P dissolved in sterile physiological saline was
intradermally injected in male mice to produce itch response, while 50 mL intradermal
administration of sterile physiologic saline served as control. Results revealed statistically
significant reduction in scratching with sertaconazole nitrate-treated animals ( p < 0.05),
compared with the reduction in scratching in 1% hydrocortisone-treated animals.
Wikstro¨m et al. conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, using
k-opioid agonist nalfurafine in 144 uremic patients with ESRD undergoing hemodialysis (19).
Itch intensity was assessed using a five-point scale and revealed a significant ( p < 0.0410)
reduction in itch intensity, as well as the number of excoriations in the body using a three-
point scale showed a significant ( p ¼ 0.0060) reduction. Safety profiles of nalfurafine were
evaluated and showed the most common adverse drug reactions were headache, insomnia,
vertigo (mediated by the central nervous system) and nausea, and vomiting (mediated by the
gastrointestinal system). These adverse drug reactions were transient and were resolved. The
results suggest that nalfurafine seem to be both an effective and safe drug in the treatment of
patients with ESRD undergoing hemodialysis.
Questionnaires for Itch Assessment
Yosipovitch et al. constructed two questionnaires for itch assessment modifying McGill’s pain
questionnaire (20,21). The first study utilized a predetermined questionnaire that provided a
detailed description of pruritus in AD in 100 atopic Chinese patients (20). The modified
questions were aimed to characterize the clinical pattern and sensory and affective dimensions
of itch experience in AD. Itch intensity was also measured using VAS. Results revealed:
(i) prolonged duration of pruritus (descending order) in lower limbs, flexures, upper limbs,
and neck; (ii) itch intensity peaked twice as much as mosquito-bite itch; (iii) itching was most
frequent at night, and most patients reported difficulty in falling asleep; (iv) daily-life activities
that increased severity of the itch were (descending order) sweat, dryness, stress, physical
effort, specific fabrics, activity, and hot water. Males significantly ( p ¼ 0.004) differed with
females in terms of activity and physical effort ( p ¼ 0.002) in increased pruritus; (v) major
factors found to reduce itch included bathing in cold water and cold ambient environment;
(vi) associated symptoms were heat sensation, sweating, and pain in the pruritic area;
(vii) most antipruritic medications have limited long-term effects; (viii) itch is bothersome and
a major distress to the patient; and (ix) the affective score significantly ( p < 0.001) correlated to
itch intensity during its peak. Taken together, the questionnaire was found to be a useful tool
in characterizing itch.
The other questionnaire constructed to measure pruritus was based on the short form of
the McGill Pain Questionnaire in 145 uremic patients (21). This modified questionnaire
included (i) patient characteristics; (ii) the use of antipruritics; (iii) effects of pruritus on
sleeping and on mood; (iv) effects of dialysis and of daily activities on itch; (v) location pruritic
sites; (vi) sensory and affective scores; and (vii) itch intensity measured using VAS.
Revalidation of the questionnaire was repeated in 28 subjects after two weeks and revealed
no significant ( p > 0.05) difference in VAS temporal states (onset, pattern, course) and no
significant ( p > 0.05) difference with regard to the sites of the itch between the two
questionnaires. Also, the reliability was high ( p < 0.01).
Studies of Possible Models for Establishing New Antipruritics
As mentioned earlier, Orito et al. developed a model for itch assessment using the SCLABA
system and proposed what may be a potential model for development of new antipruritics (8).
Thomsen et al. also proposed two models that could benefit in developing new
antipruritics (10,12). The first animal model is to topically apply nonhistaminic antipruritics
using serotonin, recognized as a weak local pruritogen in humans (12). Out of the eight
Anti-Itch Testing
577

=== Page 595 ===
substances screened (histamine, compound 48/80, kallikrein, trypsin, papain, substance P,
serotonin, and platelet-activating factor) injected intradermally (50 mL per substance) into the
rostral back of rats, only serotonin induced excessive scratching, while the rest of the substances
were weak or inactive. A dose-response curve was plotted against log10 using different
Table 1
Summary Data of Models and Efficacy of Antipruritics
Models
Efficacy
Reference
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
5-fold increased above baseline of the histamine
dose required, producing pruritus following
both cyproheptadine and placebo. A 10-fold
increased following diphenhydramine and a
750-fold increase following hydroxyzine HCl.
Rhoades et al. (22)
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
Clobetasol propionate ointment rapidly decreased
itch but did not alter warmth sensation and
thermal pain thresholds.
Yosipovitch et al. (23)
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
Menthol failed to show the effect of antipruritics.
Yosipovitch et al. (24)
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
Aspirin significantly reduced itch duration and
decreased itch magnitude.
Yosipovitch et al. (25)
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
Pramoxine significant reduced both the magnitude
and duration of itch.
Yosipovitch et al. (26)
Histamine iontophoresis-
induced itch
Capsaicin significantly reduced itch sensations.
Weisshaar et al. (28)
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
Aspirin did not decrease histamine-induced itch.
Thomsen et al. (29)
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
2.5% hydrocortisone significantly reduced histamine-
induced itch.
Zhai et al. (31)
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
Strontium nitrate showed a good antipruritic effect
in reducing histamine-mediated itch.
Zhai et al. (30)
Intradermal histamine
injection-induced itch
Pramoxine-containing cream was the most effective
antipruritic in decreasing histamine-induced itch.
Zhai et al. (32)
Histamine iontophoresis-
induced itch
Noxious heat, noxious cold, and scratching
attenuated itch via a spinal or supraspinal
mechanism.
Yosipovitch et al. (14)
Histamine iontophoresis-
induced itch
Heat pain and scratching reduced itch.
Yosipovitch et al. (15)
Histamine iontophoresis-
induced itch
Ear electro-acupuncture reduced alloknesis areas
on the forearms.
Kesting et al. (18)
Skin-pricked-histamine-
induced itch
A decrease in short-term temperature enhances
histamine-induced-itch.
Pfab et al. (16)
Intradermal injection of
8 pruritogens
Histamine and substance P were more pruritogenic
in SLS-induced inflamed skin.
Thomsen et al. (10)
Scratch behavior
measurement
Byakko-ka-ninjin-to significantly inhibited the
scratching frequency in NC mice.
Tohda et al. (33)
Intradermal serotonin
induced-itch
Serotonin is a reproducible pruritogen eliciting
scratch behavior in rats.
Thomsen et al. (12)
Intradermal compound
48/80-induced itch
MicroAct was comparable with the observer’s tally
in scratching behavior in mice.
Inagi et al. (9)
Intradermal compound
48/80-induced itch
SCLABA image analysis system was as good as
the “true” scratching behavior in mice.
Orito et al. (8)
Intradermal substance
P–induced itch
Sertconazole nitrate was comparable with 1%
hydrocortisone in reduction of scratching
behavior of mice.
Liebel et al. (11)
Lesional skin of atopic
patients
Limb-worn accelerometers were comparable with
night video-recording in assessing scratch
behavior.
Benjamin et al. (17)
Uremia-induced itch
K-opioid agonist nalfurafine was effective and
safe treatment in patients with uremia.
Wikstro¨m et al. (19)
Predetermined questionnaire
(Modified McGill Pain
Questionnaire)
Predetermined questionnaire was useful in
the assessment of itch in atopic dermatitis
patients.
Yosipovitch et al. (21)
Modified McGill Pain
Questionnaire
The reliability of Modified McGill Pain Questionnaire
was high when compared with the VAS results.
Yosipovitch et al. (20)
578
Chan et al.

=== Page 596 ===
concentrations of serotonin to evaluate possible systemic effects in: (i) 14 rats intradermally and
subcutaneously injected with 0.1 and 1 mg/mL (50 mL per dose) to the rostral and caudal back;
(ii) another four rats were given intradermal serotonin of 10 mg/mL to the caudal back;
(iii) another 10 rats for each group were given concentrations of 0.01 to 31.6 mg/mL
intradermally; and (iv) two rats were given concentration of 100 mg/mL each. Video recording
was used to objectively count scratch sequences, viewed separately by two investigators, and
showed the following: (i) number of scratch sequences of injected serotonin related to the rostral
back is significantly greater ( p < 0.001) than that of the caudal back; and (ii) number of scratch
sequences in the caudal and “other” sites did not produce a significant result. No systemic
adverse effects of serotonin occurred at 1 mg/mL, 50 mL. Scratching was probably not due to
histamine, since the screening period revealed that histamine did not produce scratching. They
concluded that serotonin is a reproducible pruritogen eliciting scratch in rats.
The second study was a randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled study
involving SLS-induced inflamed skin, as well as in normal skin in 32 healthy volunteers,
pretreated with 1% SLS in one of their volar forearms, their opposite forearms served as
control (10). They evaluated itch intensity, pain, whealing, and redness in 16 subjects given
20 mL of group A battery of substances [substance P, neurokinin A, neurokinin B, histamine
(positive control), and physiological saline (negative control)], and the other 16 given were
given 20 mL of group B battery of substances [platelet-activating factor, serotonin, trypsin,
histamine (positive control), and physiological saline (negative control)], all intradermally
injected to both forearms. Results revealed inflamed skin is significantly more pruritogenic
than normal skin in substance P ( p ¼ 0.024) and histamine compared with the control.
Neurokinin A, trypsin, PAF, and serotonin only elicited itch in normal skin, while neurokinin
B did not elicit itch in both groups. Wheal area was significantly ( p < 0.001) larger in inflamed
skin, though it did not show a significant correlation with itch intensity (Table 1).
CONCLUSION
When measuring itch, several factors must be taken into account: severity, duration, variation
between individuals, and subjective differences in determination of itching threshold. To better
quantify this subjective response, several approaches have been employed (11–19,27,34–38).
The measurement of scratch behavior is problematic, and has been addressed in a variety of
ways such as lack of validation and unlikeliness to be reproducible, etc. (12). Since human’s
verbalization may be more accurate in describing itch sensation, the VAS may provide
superior to other methods (11,12,18,19). To evaluate antipruritic drugs, clinical methods may
rely on either naturally occurring or experimentally induced pruritus. Methods and judgments
based on naturally occurring pruritus better reflects the actually clinical setting (11). However,
they have disadvantages including: (i) pruritus intensity may fluctuate on its own if the study
is conducted over several days since the naturally occurring pruritus may not be stable over
time; (ii) comparing the pruritic intensity of specific lesions in different patients is often
difficult and not always relevant, and (iii) adequate controls are difficult to achieve (11).
Histamine-induced itch model was utilized because acute itching is most commonly
evoked by chemical stimuli (e.g., histamines) (2). Some individuals do not itch after histamine
injection (34,35,38); therefore, to diminish the variation of responses, we suggest that only
subjects with histamine-induced itch sensation should be enrolled. This will improve
discrimination–an obvious advantage in a screening assay. However, the histamine injection
model may induce pain sensation; it may partially interrupt the itch sensation. We note that 1
mL injection appears high and undoubtedly spreads; this large volume has added
reproducibly to previous studies (16,17,27,34–38). The VAS score was comparatively low;
however, this level (3 cm) was adequate for the discrimination noted. Higher concentrations
might be considered in the future.
Alternatively, other itch-inducing models may well be justified in the assessment of
antipruritic drugs, complemented by new measuring devices (8–12,14–18,27,39). A recent
review of pruritus provides additional insights (40).
Lastly, it is essential that studies of topical antipruritics are well designed and double
blind so that resulting data are valid and able to distinguish between effective and noneffective
treatments.
Anti-Itch Testing
579

=== Page 597 ===
REFERENCES
1. McMahon SB, Koltzenburg M. Itching for an explanation. Trends Neurosci 1992; 15(12):497–501.
2. Tuckett RP. Neurophysiology and neuroanatomy of pruritus. In: Bernhard JD, ed. Itch Mechanisms
and Management of Pruritus. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994:1–22.
3. Lerner EA. Chemical mediators of itching. In: Bernhard JD, ed. Itch Mechanisms and Management of
Pruritus. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994:23–25.
4. Heyer GR, Hornstein OP. Recent studies of cutaneous nociception in atopic and nonatopic subjects.
J Dermatol 1999; 26:77.
5. Fleischer AB. Science of itching. In: Fleischer AB, ed. The Clinical Management of Itching. New York:
The Parthenon Publishing Group, 2000:1.
6. Schmelz M, Schmidt R, Bickel A, et al. Specific C-receptors for itch in human skin. J Neurosci 1997;
17:8003.
7. Heyer G, Ulmer FJ, Schmitz J, et al. Histamine-induced itch and alloknesis (itchy skin) in atopic
eczema patients and controls. Acta Derm Venereol 1995; 75:348.
8. Orito K, Chida Y, Fujisawa C, et al. A new analytical system for quantification scratching behavior in
mice. BJD 2004; 150:33–38.
9. Inagi N, Igeta K, Shiraishi N, et al. Evaluation and characterization of mouse scratching behavior by a
new apparatus, MicroAct. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2003; 16:165–175.
10. Thomsen JS, Sonne M, Benfeldt E, et al. Experimental itch in sodium lauryl sulfate-inflamed and
normal skin in humans: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of histamine and other
inducers of itch. Br J Dermatol 2002; 146:792–800.
11. Liebel F, Lyte P, Garay M, et al. Anti-inflammatory and anti-itch activity of sertaconazole nitrate. Acta
Dermatol Res 2006; 298:191–199.
12. Thomsen JS, Petersen MB, Benfeldt E, et al. Scratch induction in rat by intradermal serotonin: a model
for pruritus Acta Derm Venereol 2001; 81:250–254.
13. Bernhard JD. General principles, overview, and miscellaneous treatments of itching. In: Bernhard JD,
ed. Itch Mechanisms and Management of Pruritus. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994:367.
14. Yosipovitch G, Fast K, Bernhard JD. Noxious heat and scratching decreased histamine-induced itch
and skin blood flow. J Invest Dermatol 2005; 125:1268–1272.
15. Yosipovitch G, Duque MI, Fast K, et al. Scratching and noxious heat stimuli inhibit itch in humans: a
psychophysical study. BJD 2007; 156:629–634.
16. Pfab F, Valet M, Sprenger T, et al. Short-term alternating temperature enhances histamine-induced
itch: a biphasic stimulus model. J Invest Dermatol 2006; 126:2673–2678.
17. Benjamin K, Waterston K, Russell M, et al. The development of an objective method for measuring
scratch in children with atopic dermatitis suitable for clinical use. J Am Acad Dermatol 2004; 50:33–40.
18. Kesting MR, Thurmu¨ller, Ho¨lzle F, et al. Electrical ear acupuncture reduces histamine-induced itch
(Alloknesis). Acta Derm Venereol 2006; 86:399–403.
19. Wikstro¨m B, Gellert R, Ladefoged SD, et al. K-opioid system in uremic pruritus: multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical studies. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005; 16:3742–3747.
20. Yosipovitch G, Goon ATJ, Wee J, et al. Itch characteristics in Chinese patients with atopic dermatitis
using a new questionnaire for the assessment of pruritus. Int J Dermatol 2002; 41:212–216.
21. Yosipovitch G, Zucker I, Boner G, et al. A questionnaire for the assessment of pruritus: validation in
uremic patients. Acta Dermatol Venereol 2001; 81:108–111.
22. Rhoades RB, Leifer KN, Cohan R, et al. Suppression of histamine-induced pruritus by three
antihistaminic drugs. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1975; 55:180.
23. Yosipovitch G, Szolar C, Hui XY, et al. High-potency topical corticosteroid rapidly decreases
histamine-induced itch but not thermal sensation and pain in human beings. J Am Acad Dermatol
1996; 35:118.
24. Yosipovitch G, Szolar C, Hui XY, et al. Effect of topically applied menthol on thermal, pain and itch
sensations, and biophysical properties of the skin. Arch Dermatol Res 1996; 288:245.
25. Yosipovitch G, Ademola J, Lui P, et al. Topically applied aspirin rapidly decreases histamine-induced
itch. Acta Derm Venereol 1997; 77:46.
26. Yosipovitch G, Maibach HI. Effects of topical pramoxine on experimentally induced itch in man. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1997; 37:278.
27. Darsow U, Ring J, Scharein E, et al. Correlations between histamine-induced wheal, flare, and itch.
Arch Dermatol Res 1996; 288:436–441.
28. Weisshaar E, Heyer G, Forster C, et al. Effect of topical capsaicin on the cutaneous reactions and
itching to histamine in atopic eczema compared to healthy skin. Arch Dermatol Res 1998; 290:306.
29. Thomsen JS, Benfeldt E, Jensen SB, et al. Topically applied aspirin decreases histamine-induced wheal
and flare reactions in normal and SLS-inflamed skin, but does not decrease itch: a randomized,
double-blind, and placebo-controlled human study. Acta Derm Venereol 2002; 82:30.
580
Chan et al.

=== Page 598 ===
30. Zhai H, Hannon W, Hahn GS, et al. Strontium nitrate decreased histamine-induced itch magnitude
and duration in man. Dermatol 2000; 200:244.
31. Zhai H, Frisch S, Pelosi A, et al. Antipruritic and thermal sensation effects of hydrocortisone creams in
human skin. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2000; 13:352.
32. Zhai H, Simion FA, Abrutyn E, et al. Screening topical antipruritics: a histamine-induced itch human
model. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15:213.
33. Tohda C, Sugahara H, Kuraishi Y, et al. Inhibitory effect of Byakko-ka-ninjin-to on itch in a mouse
model of atopic dermatitis. Phytother Res 2000; 14:192.
34. Spilker B. Clinical evaluation of topical antipruritics and antihistamines. In: Maibach HI, Lowe NJ,
eds. Models in Dermatology. Basel: Karger, 1987:55.
35. Fleischer AB. Measuring itching and scratching. In: Fleischer AB, ed. The Clinical Management of
Itching. New York: The Parthenon Publishing Group, 2000:13.
36. Fleischer AB. Evaluation of the itching patient. In: Fleischer AB, ed. The Clinical Management of
Itching. New York: The Parthenon Publishing Group, 2000:21.
37. Litt JZ. Topical treatments of itching without corticosteroids. In: Bernhard JD, ed. Itch Mechanisms
and Management of Pruritus. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994:383.
38. Fleischer AB. Treatment. In: Fleischer AB, ed. The Clinical Management of Itching. New York: The
Parthenon Publishing Group, 2000:159.
39. Ebata T, Aizawa H, Kamide R, et al. The characteristics of nocturnal scratching in adults with atopic
dermatitis. Br J Dermatol 1999; 141:82.
40. Weisshaar E, Kucenic MJ, Fleischer AB Jr. Pruritus: a review. Acta Derm Venereol Suppl (Stockh)
2003; (suppl 213):5–32.
Anti-Itch Testing
581

=== Page 600 ===
56
Comedogenicity in Rabbit: Some Cosmetic
Ingredients/Vehicles
Shawn H. Nguyen, Thao P. Dang, and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Several cosmetic ingredients have been shown to be comedogenic using the rabbit ear assay
(1,2). On the basis of the animal assay and short-term human clinical studies, the development
of comedones has been attributed to prolonged use of cosmetics (1,2). Although there are
limitations of the rabbit model in the application of test results to humans (1–4), much
information on the comedogenicity of topically applied substances has been based on the
rabbit ear assay because it permits rapid screening of many possible offenders. The present
chapter is concerned with this theme and reports our finding on the activity of certain raw
materials previously investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
To quantify the rabbit comedogenicity data obtained using Kligman’s design (1) for acnegenic
potential of coded samples in the rabbit ear assay, test and control articles were purchased
commercially, which included stearyl alcohol; sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS)—0.1%, 1.0%, 10.0%
in petrolatum; butyl stearate—1.0%, 10.0%, 25.0% in petrolatum; isopropyl palmitate 1.0%,
10.0%, 25.0% in petrolatum; myristyl myristate (50% in petrolatum); isopropyl myristate (50%
in cold cream); isopropyl palmitate (50% in vanishing cream); isopropyl myristate (50% in
vanishing cream); isopropyl myristate (50% in propylene glycol); isopropyl palmitate (50% in
propylene glycol); and isopropyl myristate (50% in ethanol). Isopropyl palmitate (d prime);
butyl stearate; paraffin; cetyl alcohol; cocoa butter; decyl oleate; isostearyl neopentonate;
isopropyl isostearate; isocetyl stearate; commercial cocoa samples labeled A, B, C, D, E, F, and
G; guittard cocoa butter (control); and petrolatum were tested as is.
Samples were stored at room temperature. All test samples were of USP grade.
New Zealand male and female white rabbits, randomly outbred, were delivered at 2.5 kg
and acclimated at least four days before entering the study. The rabbit was selected as the test
system because of its proclivity to develop comedones (1–6).
Animal identification was via tattoo. The rabbits kept on an 11- to 12-hour light/dark
cycle, at room temperature, 718F to 748F (22–238C), and one per cage, were fed commercial
laboratory feed (purina chow) and treated potable water available at all times.
The cosmetic ingredient samples were applied to the ears of adult female albino rabbits
according to the Rabbit Ear Comedogenic Assay. Each sample was applied daily (Monday
through Friday) to the glabrous inner portion of three ears for four consecutive weeks, adding
up to a total of 20 applications. Approximately, 0.5 mL or 0.5 gm of the sample was applied
with a pipette or syringe, and spread with a glass applicator. Controls consisted of 10% crude
coal tar. Coal tar evoked a comedogenic score of 4 on all control animals (data not shown).
Ingredient samples were applied to both ears during the tests. At the end of four weeks, each
rabbit ear was biopsied and examined for evidence of comedone formation. An elliptical
sample, about 2.5 cm long, was blunt dissected down to the cartilage and immersed in water at
608C for two minutes. The epidermis was peeled off as an intact sheet; its undersurface

=== Page 601 ===
examined under a stereomicroscope. Grading was done in a manner similar to the visual
grading system (see below).
Scoring System: 0 ¼ none
1 ¼ a few comedones
2 ¼ many comedones
3 ¼ extensive comedones
4 ¼ confluent involvement
RESULTS
Test results (Table 1) indicate that the ester ingredients selected had comedogenic scores that
ranged from 1 to 4: isopropyl palmitate, butyl stearate, isopropyl isostearate, and decyl oleate
scored highest in its pure form with scores ranging from 3 to 4. Manipulation of testing
conditions through dilution of concentration and mixture of ingredients either increased or
decreased comedogenic potentials. The addition of vanishing cream to isopropyl palmitate and
isopropyl myristate increased their comedogenicities, pushing means scores close to 4, despite
a 50% dilution. Isocetyl stearate, myristle myristate, cetyl alcohol, and stearyl alcohol had the
least comedogenic potential, with mean scores of only 1 to 2.
SLS was tested in petrolatum at concentrations of 0.1%, 1%, and 10%. Results (Table 2)
indicate low comedogenic potentials for these specific combinations. Mean scores were in the
range of 1.
Table 1
Comedogenic Scores of Esters and Alcohols
Mean day 20 (clinical)
Mean (slide biopsy)
Test article
L
R
L
R
Isopropyl palmitate (d prime)
3  0
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
Isopropyl palmitate 1% in petrolatum
1.3  0.5
1.6  0.5
1.3  0.5
1.6  0.5
Isopropyl palmitate 10% in petrolatum
1.3  0.5
1.3  0.5
1.3  0.5
1.6  0.5
Isopropyl palmitate 25% in petrolatum
1  0
1.6  0.5
1  0
1.6  0.5
Isopropyl palmitate in vanishing cream (50%)
4  0
4  0
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
Isopropyl palmitate in propylene glycol (50%)
3  0
3  0
3  0
3  0
Isopropyl myristate in cold cream (50%)
3  1
3.3  0.5
3  1
3.3  0.5
Isopropyl myristate in vanishing cream (50%)
4  0
4  0
4  0
4  0
Isopropyl myristate in propylene glycol (50%)
3  1
3  1
3.3  0.5
3.3  0.5
Isopropyl myristate in ethanol (50%)
4  0
4  0
4  0
4  0
Butyl stearate
4  0
4  0
4  0
4  0
Butyl stearate 1% in petrolatum
1  0
1  0
1  0
1.3  0.5
Butyl stearate 10% in petrolatum
1.6  0.5
2  0
2  0
2  0
Butyl stearate 25% in petrolatum
2  0
2  0
2  0
2  0
Isopropyl isostearate
3.6  0.5
4  0
3.6  0.5
4  0
Decyl oleate
3.3  0.5
3.3  0.5
3.3  0.5
3.3  0.5
Isostearyl neopentanoate
2  0
2  0
3  0
3  0
Isocetyl stearate
1  0
1  0
2  0
2  0
Myristle myristate
1.3  0.5
1.3  0.5
1.6  0.5
2  0
Cetyl alcohol
1.3  0.5
1.3  0.5
1  0
1.3  0.5
Stearyl alcohol
1.3  0.5
1.3  0.5
1  0
1  0
Table 2
Comedogenic Scores of Surfactants
Mean day 20 (clinical)
Mean (slide biopsy)
Test article
L
R
L
R
SLS 0.1% in petrolatum
1  0
1  0
1  0
1  0
SLS 1% in petrolatum
1  0
1.3  0.5
1  0
1  0
SLS 10% in petrolatum
1.6  0.5
1.6  0.5
1.3  0.5
1.3  0.5
Abbreviation: SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate.
584
Nguyen et al.

=== Page 602 ===
Paraffin and petrolatum, used as control vehicles, did not yield significant comedogenic
potential scores, whereas cocoa butter displayed high results (Table 3). The majority of
comedogenic scores fell between 3 and 4.
DISCUSSION
Among the tested ingredients, decyl oleate, isopropyl palmitate, isopropyl myristate, isopropyl
isostearate, isostearyl neopentanoate, isocetyl stearate, myristyl myristate, butyl stearate, and
cocoa butter were deemed comedogenic. All of the esters are most commonly found in
products such as night cream, wrinkle removal cream, sunscreen, moisturizer, hair care
products, lipstick, concealer, antiperspirant, as well as baby care products. Cocoa butter is a
prevalent ingredient in cosmetics due to its smooth texture and sweet fragrance. It is found in
soaps, lotions, skin care products, and suntan lotion. Since we rely on the use of common
household cosmetics to maintain our hygienic regimen, comedogenicity should be considered
in the development of cosmetics, skin care products, and topical medications. The Cosmetic,
Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (CTFA), the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR), and
physicians may consider providing available information about the ingredients of such
products to their consumers. These findings are significant and are worth noting; otherwise,
consumers may be misguided about the effects of using such products (7).
Data from this study generates a theory for dosage and purity dependence. The initial
tests for isopropyl palmitate and butyl stearate were done using the ingredients in their purity
at 100% concentration, yielding a mean score of 3.3 and 4, respectively, for week 4. However,
when the tests were repeated using isopropyl palmitate and butyl stearate at concentrations of
1%, 10%, and 25% in conjunction with petrolatum, results were significantly different. Scores
declined to an average of 1 to 1.7 for isopropyl palmitate and an average of 1 to 2 for butyl stearate
at week 4. The results indicate that the comedogenic properties of these ingredients depend on
either dosage or purity. Unfortunately, since both purity and concentration were manipulated in
one test, it is not possible to determine whether the reduction in the comedogenicity was due to
the dilution of concentration, purity, or both. In another case where vanishing cream was added
to isopropyl palmitate and isopropyl myristate, comedogenicity escalated to a score of 4, despite
a 50% dilution. Is it possible that cosmetic products developed using recommended USP grade
have potent acnegenic results? This is a matter that may be worth investigating.
The ultrasensitivity of the rabbit follicle to respond readily to test materials has been
extensively documented (1–6,8). Our study sought to quantify comedogenic data collected
with the commonly used model: Kligman’s rabbit assay. However, the lack of a systematic
Table 3
Comedogenic Scores of Petrolatum Products and Cocoa Butter
Mean day 20 (clinical)
Mean (slide biopsy)
Test article
L
R
L
R
Petrolatum (control)
1  0
1.3  0.5
1  0
1.3  0.5
Paraffin
1  0
1.3  0.5
1  0
1  0
Cocoa butter (#81-C FDA-1B)
3.3  0.5
3.3  0.5
3.3  0.5
3.6  0.5
Cocoa butter (#82-C FDA-2)
3  0
3  0
3.3  0.5
3  0
Cocoa butter A
2.6  0.5
3.3  0.5
2.6  0.5
2.6  0.5
Cocoa butter B
3.3  0.5
3.6  0.5
3.3  0.5
3.3  0.5
Cocoa butter C
3  0
3  0
2.6  0.5
2.6  0.5
Cocoa butter D
3.6  0.5
4  0
4  0
4  0
Cocoa butter E
3.6  0.5
4  0
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
Cocoa butter F
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
Cocoa butter G
3.3  0.5
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
3.6  0.5
Cocoa butter (control)
3  0
3  0
3.3  0.5
3  0
Tables display comedogenic potential scores  standard deviation based on a 5-point scale, in which 4 is the
highest score. Results listed were obtained at the end of the four-week test period (day 20) using visual and
steromicroscopic (slide biopsy) examination. The cocoa butter samples represented different commercial
production batches.
Comedogenicity in Rabbit
585

=== Page 603 ===
database for such information restricts the use of compiled results as a direct correlation to
humans. Instead, results from such studies should only be used as a guideline for formulation
programs.
To further correlate these results with human reactions, specific studies on humans need
to be done. Kligman’s four-week patch test conducted on human subjects demonstrates a
positive correlation between the animal and human model (4). However, there are two major
differences worth noting. First, humans are less sensitive to “acne cosmetica” than rabbits (4).
For example, comedogenic substances of scores 1 or 2 that evoke comedones on rabbits may
not affect humans (4). Second, the rabbit model takes longer to yield results than the human
model. Humans usually experience acute pustulation during the first 24 hours, whereas
rabbits typically take three to four weeks to fully express comedones (9). Comedone expression
is also present in humans, but it does not occur as frequently as on rabbits. These differences
suggest that there may be a different mechanism involved in the production of pustules on
humans.
Taken together, this data may be added to dermatotoxicologic ingredient profiles; yet
much remains to be done before we can fully comprehend its meaning. Results obtained by
Fulton (10) have deemed isopropyl myristate, isopropyl palmitate, isopropyl isostearate, butyl
stearate, isostearyl neopentanoate, myristle myristate, decyl oleate, and isocetyl stearate as
offenders. However, the CTFA and CIR maintains that the use of all these ingredients is safe at
its appropriate concentration (11).
REFERENCES
1. Kligman AM, Mills OH. Acne cosmetica. Arch Dermatol 1972; 106:843.
2. Fulton JE, Bradley S, Aquendex A, et al. Noncomedogneic cosmetics. Cutis 1976; 17:344–351.
3. Kligman AM. Pathogenis of Acne Vulgaris II. Histopathology of comedones induced in the rabbit ear
by human sebum. Arch Dermatol 1968; 98:58–66.
4. Mill OH, Kligman A. A human model for assessing comedogenic substances. Arch Dermatol 1982;
118:903–905.
5. Plewig G, Fulton JE, Kligman AM. Pomade acne. Arch Dermatol 1970; 101:580–584.
6. Kligman AM, Katz AG. Pathogenesis of acne vulgaris. I. Comedogenic properties of human sebum in
external ear canal of the rabbit. Arch Dermatol 1968; 98:53–66.
7. Mills OH, Kligman AM. Acne detergicans. Arch Dermatol 1975; 111:65–68.
8. Mills OH, Kligman AM. Is sulphur helpful or harmful in acne vulgaris? Brit J Dermatol 1972; 86:420.
9. Wahlberg JE, Maibach HI. Sterile pustules: a manifestation of primary irritancy? Identification of
contact pustulogens. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 76:381–383.
10. Fulton JE, Pay SR, Fulton JE. Comedogenicity of current therapeutic products, cosmetics, and
ingredients in the rabbit ear. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984; 10(1):96–105.
11. Cosmetic Ingredient Findings: 1976-Current: Quick Reference Table. (n.d.). Retrieved January 08,
2007, from http://www.cir-safety.org/staff_files/ReferenceTable.pdf.
586
Nguyen et al.

=== Page 604 ===
57
Skin-Whitening Agents
Hongbo Zhai and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Skin hyperpigmentation is common and often causes psychosocial distress (1). Therapeutical
interventions include whitening agents, chemical peels, lasers, and physical methods (1–3).
Although multiple interventions are available, skin-whitening agents, due to their simplicity
and convenience, continue to be the mainstay of approach to either lighten skin (individuals
who wish to change or modify their skin color) in the cosmetic field or depigment skin
(treatment for abnormal hyperpigmentation skin such as melasma, freckles, and actinic
lentigines) in the clinical therapy. Commonly used whitening agents include hydroquinone,
arbutin, kojic acid, ascorbic acid, and its derivatives. Their efficacy, mechanism, and safety
have been extensively reviewed (4). This chapter revises the previous version (4) and updates
current progress.
SKIN-WHITENING AGENTS
Hydroquinone
Hydroquinone (1,4-dihydroxybenzene) is used in the photographic, rubber, chemical, and
cosmetic industries. In the late 1930s, it was observed that monobenzyl ether of hydroquinone,
a chemical used in the manufacture of rubber, caused depigmented skin in some workers (5).
The efficacy of hydroquinone as a skin-lightening agent has been established in both
human and animal studies. Clinically, hydroquinone is applied topically in the treatment of
melasma, freckles, and senile lentigines as well as postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH).
In the United States, hydroquinone is available in concentrations up to 2% as an over-the-
counter (OTC) drug and by prescription at higher concentrations (2,5).
Hydroquinone inhibits the conversion of dopa to melanin by inhibiting the tyrosinase
enzyme (2,5,6). Other proposed mechanisms are inhibition of DNA and RNA synthesis,
degradation of melanosomes, and destruction of melanocytes (2). Electron microscopic studies of
black guinea pig skin treated with hydroquinone show the anatomic consequences of this action:
(i) the melanosome structure is disturbed, resulting in decreased production or increased
degradation of these organelles, or both; (ii) hydroquinone exposure can ultimately lead to
melanocyte degradation; and (iii) keratinocytes are spared, showing no apparent injury (5).
Arndt and Fitzpatrick (7), in a non-placebo-controlled study, compared the efficacy of 2%
and 5% hydroquinone cream for treatment of pigmentary disorders in 56 patients.
Hydroquinone was a moderately effective depigmenting agent in 80% of cases. There was
no efficacy difference between the two concentrations; however, 2% hydroquinone was less
irritating than 5%.
In another non-placebo-controlled study, Fitzpatrick et al. (8) evaluated the efficacy of a
2% cream of stabilized hydroquinone in 93 patients. Of those patients, 64% showed decreasing
hypermelanosis.
Kligman and Willis (9) noted enhanced efficacy with 5% hydroquinone, 0.1% tretinoin,
and 0.1% dexamethasone in hydrophilic ointment for the treatment of melasma, ephelides, and
PIH on adult male blacks in a non-placebo-controlled study. In contrast, they experienced poor
results with each of the aforementioned as monotherapies. However, actinic lentigines were
resistant.
Gano and Garcia (10) conducted a 10-week clinical trial in 20 women with melasma.
Topical applications of 0.05% tretinoin, 0.1% betamethasone valerate, and 2% hydroquinone
were used in a non-placebo-controlled study. There was an objective improvement rate of 65%
and a subjective improvement rate of 95%. Side effects were frequent but minimal. Caution is

=== Page 605 ===
necessary when using potent fluorinated corticosteroids for prolonged periods on the face
since it may result in epidermal atrophy, telangiectasia, rosacea-like erythemas, acne, and
perioral dermatitis. Particularly, it may also exert an antimetabolic effect, resulting in
decreased epidermal turnover, and, thus, may produce a mild depigmenting effect (11).
However, when used in combination with tretinoin and hydroquinone in the treatment of
melasma, fluocinolone acetonide 0.01% suppresses biosynthetic and secretory functions of
melanocytes, and thus melanin production, leading to early response in melasma, synergy
among the three agents, and no significant side effects over an eight-week period (11).
Gellin et al. (12) established a reliable in vivo method to predict the depigmenting action
of chemicals on mammalian melanocytes. Black guinea pigs and black mice were used as
animal models to screen the depigmenting capacity of several phenols, catechols, and organic
antioxidants. Results showed that complete depigmentation on all test sites was achieved with
mono-methyl ether of hydroquinone and p-tertiary butyl catechol in the black guinea pig. Less
pronounced pigment loss was noted with these chemicals in black mice.
Pathak et al. (13) clinically tested the efficacy of hydroquinone in varying concentrations
supplemented with corticosteroids or retinoic acid (tretinoin) in 300 Hispanic women with
melasma in a non-placebo-controlled study and concluded that cream or lotion formulations of
2% hydroquinone and 0.05% to 0.1% retinoic acid provided the most favorable results. In
addition, avoidance of sun exposure and constant use of broad-spectrum sunscreens are
requisite for efficacy. They also suggested that patients should suspend use of oral
contraceptives and other agents that promote skin pigmentation.
Sanchez and Vazquez (14) treated 46 patients with melasma, using two versions of a 3%
hydroalcoholic solution of hydroquinone. In this non-placebo-controlled study, overall
improvement was noted in 88% of the patients and moderate to marked improvement in
36%. Side effects were minimal. Vazquez and Sanchez (15), in a double-blind and vehicle-
controlled study, compared a broad-spectrum sunscreen agent with its vehicle in the treatment
of melasma in 53 patients who were concomitantly using a depigmentating solution. They
reported that 96.2% of those who used the sunscreen agent showed improvement as compared
with 80.7% of placebo group. These results suggested that the use of sunscreen might be
necessary for efficacy in the treatment of pigmentation disorders.
Clarys and Barel (16) tested the efficacy of an ascorbate-phytohydroquinone complex in
14 patients with actinic lentigo in a non-placebo-controlled study. Objective skin color changes
were evaluated with a chromameter. After one month of treatment, a clear depigmentation of
the macules was measured.
Haddad et al. (17), in a double-blind, randomized, prospective study, compared the
effectiveness of two products with placebo in 30 patients with melasma over three months. In
group 1, a 4% hydroquinone cream was applied to one side of the face where placebo applied
to opposite sides; group 2, a 5% skin-whitening complex cream was applied to one side of the
face where placebo applied to opposite sides. A standard sunscreen was used daily. Group 1
(hydroquinone and placebo) presented an improvement of 76.9% with 25% side effects, and
group 2 (skin-whitening complex and placebo) presented an improvement of 66.7% with 0%
side effects. They concluded that both depigmentation agents were equally effective in the
treatment of melasma; however, the skin-whitening complex seems to be an excellent choice
since its adverse effects were nil.
Grimes (18) evaluated a microsponge formulation of 4% hydroquinone with 0.15%
retinol on 28 patients of melasma and PIH in a 12-week open-label study. Patients applied the
formulation on the full face twice daily (morning and evening). A broad-spectrum sunscreen
was applied once in the morning, 15 minutes after application of the test product. Results
showed that tested formulation produced significant improvement at all study endpoints
(weeks 4, 8, and 12) when compared with baseline. The tolerance of patients to this formulation
was good.
Espinal-Perez et al. (19) compared a 5% ascorbic acid cream and a 4% hydroquinone
cream on a randomized split-face-designed study with 16 female patients of melasma over
16 weeks. Sunscreen was applied daily throughout the observation period. The hydroquinone
side showed 93% good and excellent results, compared with 62.5% on the ascorbic acid side;
however, side effects were present in 68.7% (11/16) with hydroquinone versus 6.2% (1/16)
with ascorbic acid. They concluded that ascorbic acid may provide a beneficial effect on
melasma, with a minimum of adverse effects when compared to hydroquinone.
588
Zhai and Maibach

=== Page 606 ===
Ferreira Cestari et al. (20), in a multicenter, open-label, randomized, eight-week clinical
trial, compared the efficacy and safety of a triple combination (TC) cream and monotherapy
with hydroquinone cream in the treatment of moderate to severe facial melasma of 120
patients. TC cream was significantly more effective than hydroquinone cream (73% vs. 49%).
Adverse events (erythema, burning sensation, and desquamation) were similar in both groups.
In some cases, higher concentrations of hydroquinone may be used. The formulations
contain concentrations as high as 10% combined with non-fluorinated corticoid creams with or
without the additional use of tretinoin or hydroxy acids such as glycolic acid. Extempora-
neously compounded preparations are often effective in patients who have failed to respond to
lower concentrations of hydroquinone. With controlled use and monitoring, side effects from
these preparations have proved minimal (2). However, note that hydroquinone may be quickly
oxidized in such formulations.
Hydroquinone occurs in nature as the b-glucopyranoside conjugate (arbutin). Arbutin is
a mild agent for treating cutaneous hyperpigmentation, including melasma and ultraviolet
(UV)-induced ephelides (21). Arbutin is an active ingredient of the crude drug uvae ursi folium
traditionally used in Japan and contained in the leaves of pear trees and certain herbs. Maeda
and Fukuda (21) determined arbutin’s inhibitory action on the melanin synthetic enzyme and
its effects on melanin intermediates and melanin production in cultured human melanocytes.
They indicated that the depigmentation effect of arbutin works through an inhibition of the
melanosomal tyrosinase activity, rather than by suppression of the expression and synthesis of
tyrosinase in human melanocytes. Arbutin was less cytotoxic than hydroquinone to cultured
human melanocytes.
Adverse reactions associated with hydroquinone use include both acute and chronic
complications. Among acute reactions are irritant dermatitis, nail discoloration, and PIH (5).
Although generally assumed to be a common allergen, the documentation of hydroquinone
allergic contact dermatitis is weak (5). Hydroquinone use can also induce hypopigmentation
and, rarely, depigmentation of treated surrounding normal skin. But, these changes are
temporary and resolve on cessation of hydroquinone treatment, in contrast to monobenzone
use, which can cause permanent depigmentation (22). Hence, the only indication for
monobenzone therapy is in the treatment of severe vitiligo.
A more recent concern regarding the use of hydroquinone is the occurrence of
hydroquinone-induced ochronosis, a chronic disfiguring condition resulting, in general, from
the prolonged use of high concentrations of hydroquinone (22,23).
Hydroquinone’s acute and chronic toxicity toward higher terrestrial organisms appears
to be minimal in humans (24,25). In an epidemiologic investigation, 478 persons employed as
photographic processors showed no significant excess mortality, sickness/absence, or cancer
incidence (24). The reported nephropathy and cell proliferation, as evidence of carcinogenicity,
observed in Fischer 344/N rats (26,27), appears to be strain specific and sex specific (27).
Hydroquinone was negative in the Ames/Salmonella and Drosophila genotoxicity assays (28).
Others suggest that carcinogenic and teratogenic potentials have been inadequately studied
(24,29) and that both hydroquinone and benzoquinone produce cytotoxic effects on human
and mouse bone marrow cells (30). Hydroquinone in an alcoholic vehicle readily penetrates
human forehead skin in vivo following a single 24-hour topical exposure; elimination was
complete within five days (31). Wester et al. (32) determined the topical bioavailability,
metabolism, and disposition of hydroquinone on humans in vivo and in vitro; dose recovery in
urine was 45.3%, of which the majority was excreted in the first 24 hours.
Kojic Acid
Kojic acid, a fungal metabolic product, is increasingly being used as a skin-lightening agent in
skin care products marketed in Japan since 1988. It was first isolated from Aspergillus in 1907
(33). Kojic acid suppresses free tyrosinase, mainly attributable to chelation of its copper (33–35),
and it has been shown to be responsible for therapy and prevention of pigmentation, both in
vitro and in vivo (34,36,37).
In Japan, it is used in nonprescription skin care products up to a concentration of 1%. To
increase percutaneous absorption and thus therapeutic activity, it is usually used at the highest
concentration allowed (33).
Since it is used intensively in foods (such as bean paste, soy, and sake) in some countries,
particularly Japan, its oral safety has been studied.
Skin-Whitening Agents
589

=== Page 607 ===
Shibuya et al. (38) investigated the mutagenicity of kojic acid by the Ames test, by the
forward mutation test in cultured Chinese hamster cells, and by the dominant lethal test in
mice. They concluded that although kojic acid is a weak mutagen in bacteria, it is non-
mutagenic in the eukaryotic system either in vivo or in vitro.
Abdel-Hafez and Shoreit (39) tested the mycotoxins, using the dilution plate method;
kojic acid may induce some toxins. Fujimoto et al. (40) examined the tumorigenicity of kojic
acid in B6C3F1 mice. Three groups of animals were given food containing 0%, 1.5%, and 3.0%
kojic acid for six weeks; mice in the groups ingesting kojic acid showed significantly higher
frequency of induced thyroid tumors.
But true adverse effects after human oral ingestion have not been demonstrated.
Nakagawa et al. (33) noted no signs of relapse of dermatitis or any other adverse effects on
sensitized patients upon ingestion of foods containing kojic acid; however, they also noted that
topical application may induce allergic contact dermatitis with sensitized patients. They
postulated that kojic acid was considered to have a high sensitizing potential, because of the
comparatively high frequency of contact sensitivity in patients using one or more kojic acid–
containing products.
Majmudar et al. (36) used an in vitro model to evaluate the efficacy, stability, and
cytotoxicity of whitening agents. They also conducted a non-placebo-controlled clinical study
that indicated that kojic acid in an anhydrous base can induce more skin lightening than in an
aqueous base.
Recently, Lim (37) conducted a non-placebo-controlled study to test 2% kojic acid in a gel
containing 2% glycolic acid and 2% hydroquinone in 40 Chinese women who had epidermal
melasma for 12 weeks. Half of the face was treated with the above formulation. The other half
was treated with a formulation that was identical, except that it contained no kojic acid. Results
showed similar improvement in melasma on both the sides. More than half (60%) of the
melasma cleared in sides receiving kojic acid, whereas less than half (48%) cleared in the side
denied kojic acid; in particular, two patients had complete clearance only in the kojic acid–
treated side. However, the improvement did not show a statistical difference between the
formulations.
Ascorbic Acid and its Derivatives
Ascorbic acid may inhibit melanin production by reducing o-quinones (41), so that melanin
cannot be formed by the action of tyrosinase until all vitamin C is oxidized. Because vitamin C
is quickly oxidized and decomposes in aqueous solution, it is not generally useful as a
depigmenting agent.
Recently, stable derivatives of vitamin C have been synthesized to minimize this problem
(41–44). Magnesium-L-ascorbyl-2-phosphate (VC-PMG) is a vitamin C derivative that is stable
in water, especially in neutral or alkaline solution containing boric acid or its salt (41). VC-PMG
is hydrolyzed by phosphatases of the liver or skin to vitamin C and thus exhibits vitamin C–
reducing activity (41).
Kameyama et al. (41) investigated the effects of VC-PMG on melanogenesis in vitro and
in vivo. Results from their non-placebo-controlled study suggested that the topical application
of VC-PMG was significantly effective in lightening the skin in 19 of 34 patients with chloasma
or senile freckles and in 3 of 25 subjects with normally pigmented healthy skin.
Other Agents
Glutathione is a ubiquitous compound found in human bodies. It has recently received
attention since it possesses skin-lightening function. The proposed mechanisms of action
include (i) direct inactivation of the enzyme tyrosinase by binding with the copper-containing
active site of the enzyme, (ii) mediating the switch mechanism from eumelanin to
phaeomelanin production, (iii) quenching of free radicals and peroxides that contribute to
tyrosinase activation and melanin formation, and (iv) modulation of depigmenting abilities of
melanocytotoxic agents (45). Villarama and Maibach (45) review the evidence of its
involvement in the melanogenic pathway and shed light on its anti-melanogenic effects that
have been documented in in vitro and in vivo studies. However, they suggested that to
validate the effectiveness of glutathione, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
studies in humans are warranted.
590
Zhai and Maibach

=== Page 608 ===
Since many predisposing factors—such as pregnancy or exposure to sunlight (in the UVB
and UVA ranges)—may cause hyperpigmentation, various systemic drugs and natural
products have been used as protective agents. These agents include chloroquine, indometha-
cin, vitamin C and E, fish oil, and green tea (46).
Funasaka et al. (47) demonstrated that oral vitamin E [a-tocopherol (a-T)] supplementa-
tion can improve facial hyperpigmentation: the inhibitory effect of tocopheryl ferulate (a-TF)
on melanogenesis was examined biochemically using human melanoma cells in culture. a-TF,
solubilized in ethanol or in 0.5% lecithin, inhibited melanization significantly, as did a-T at a
concentration of 100 mg/mL, without inhibiting cell growth.
Kobayashi et al. (48) reported that neoagarobiose, a disaccharide, could be useful as a
novel whitening agent because it has moisturizing and whitening effects with low cytotoxicity
on B16 murine melanoma cells. However, it should be validated on human skin in vivo.
Schmaus et al. (49) recently identified a new potent lightening agent, 4-(1-phenylethyl)
1,3-benzenediol, a dihydroxylated diphenylmethane derivative. Data obtained from in vitro
and in vivo studies on human skin showed good lightening effects.
Ando et al. (50) evaluated the effects of unsaturated fatty acids on UV-induced
hyperpigmentation of the skin in a placebo (vehicle)-controlled study. Skin hyperpigmenta-
tion was induced on the backs of guinea pigs by UVB exposure. Oleic acid, linoleic acid (LA),
and a-linolenic acid (0.5% in ethanol), or ethanol alone as a control, were then topically
applied daily five times weekly for three successive weeks. Results suggest that the pigment-
lightening effects of LA and a-linolenic acid are, at least in part, due to suppression of melanin
production by active melanocytes and enhanced desquamation of melanin pigment from the
epidermis.
A new combination product composed of 2% 4-hydroxyanisole (mequinol) and 0.01%
tretinoin (all-trans-retinoic acid) in an ethanolic solution is being studied for its safety and
efficacy as a topical treatment for disorders of skin hyperpigmentation (51). Fleischer et al. (51)
evaluated efficacy in a controlled, double-blind trial. Subjects were randomized to treatment
with the combination solution, or one of the active components (4-hydroxyanisole or tretinoin),
or vehicle twice daily to all solar lentigines and related hyperpigmented lesions on the
face, forearms, and backs of hands for up to 24 weeks. The combination solution
(2% 4-hydroxyanisole and 0.01% tretinoin) was clinically superior to each of its active
components and to the vehicle in the treatment of solar lentigines. Most skin-related adverse
events were mild and were similar for both the combination solution and tretinoin treatment
groups.
Bissett et al. (52) evaluated the effectiveness of a stable derivative N-acetyl glucosamine
(NAG) to reduce facial hyperpigmentation in two separate studies. Topical 2% NAG, its
vehicle control, 4% niacinamide, and a combination of 2% NAG with 4% niacinamide were
compared in an eight-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, left-right randomized, split-face
clinical test. Data showed that 2% NAG was effective in improving the appearance of facial
hyperpigmentation. The combination formulation provided the best results.
Hamed et al. (53) reported the efficacy and safety of deoxyarbutin, a new tyrosinase-
inhibiting agent both in vitro and in vivo on human skin. They demonstrated that
deoxyarbutin has the potential to be as safe and effective as a depigmenting agent and
suggested that it may act an as an alternative agent to hydroquinone.
Shigeta et al. (54) evaluated the effect of liposomalization on the whitening activity of LA
by using LA in ethanol, hydrogel-containing LA, and hydrogel-containing liposomal LA
toward the UV-stimulated hyperpigmented dorsal skin of brownish guinea pigs. In addition,
the whitening effect of LA was examined with UV-stimulated hyperpigmented human upper
arm skin by using a hydrogel-containing liposomal LA (0.1% LA) and non-liposomal LA (3.0,
10.0% LA). Liposomal LA was significantly more effective than non-liposomal formulations in
reducing hyperpigmentation of both pigskin and human skin.
Recently, natural substances extracted from plants have attracted attention as source of
potential skin-whitening agent due to their biologically active compounds in medicine, and
they may also be isolated in high quantities at low cost. Tengamnuay et al. (55) assessed the
heartwood extract of Artocarpus lakoocha Roxb for the in vitro tyrosinase inhibitory activity and
the in vivo melanin-reducing efficacy in human volunteers. They concluded that A. lakoocha
has a promising potential for use as an effective and economical skin-whitening agent. Wang
et al. (56) examined 25 traditional Chinese herbal medicines on human epidermal melanocytes
Skin-Whitening Agents
591

=== Page 609 ===
to identify the effects of skin-whitening and skin health. They found four herbal preparations
to be potent tyrosinase and melanin synthesis inhibitors. However, this finding needs to be
validated in vivo on human skin.
Taylor et al. (57) mentioned several combinations of whitening formulations in
comparison with monotherapies such as hydroquinone and retinoids to treat the PIH.
Findings suggested that 2% mequinol with 0.01% tretinoin solution is a promising alternative
for the treatment of PIH.
Chemical peels are also effective and safe in treatment of pigmentation disorders. Grimes
(58) investigated the clinical efficacy and safety of a new superficial salicylic acid peel in
individuals of skin types V and VI. The patients were pretreated for two weeks with
hydroquinone 4% prior to undergoing a series of five salicylic acid chemical peels. The
concentrations of salicylic acid were 20% and 30%. The peels were performed at two-week
intervals. Results suggested that superficial salicylic acid peels are both safe and efficacious for
treatment of melasma and PIH.
Brief data of key skin-whitening agents are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1
Brief Data of Key Skin-Whitening Agents
Whitening agents
Study design
Models
References
Hydroquinone
2% and 5%
Non-placebo-controlled study
In vivo in humans
(7)
2%
Non-placebo-controlled study
In vivo in humans
(8)
5%, in combination with 0.1% tretinoin
and 0.1% dexamethasone
Non-placebo-controlled study
In vivo in humans
(9)
2%, in combination with 0.05%
tretinoin and 0.1%
betamethasone valerate
Non-placebo-controlled study
In vivo in humans
(10)
Phenols, catechols, and organic
antioxidants
Screening
In vivo in black
guinea pigs and
black mice
(12)
2%, in combination with 0.05–0.1%
retinoic acid
Non-placebo-controlled study
In vivo in humans
(13)
3%
Non-placebo-controlled study
In vivo in humans
(14)
In combination of a broad-spectrum
sunscreen agent
Double-blind and vehicle-
controlled study
In vivo in humans
(15)
Ascorbate-phytohydroquinone
Non-placebo-controlled study
In vivo in humans
(16)
4%, and 5% skin-whitening complex
cream
Double-blind, randomized,
prospective study
In vivo in humans
(17)
4%, with 0.15% retinol
Open-label study
In vivo in humans
(18)
4%, and 5% ascorbic acid cream
Randomized split-face
designed study
In vivo in humans
(19)
4%, in comparsion with a TC cream
Multicenter, open-label,
randomized clinical trial
In vivo in humans
(20)
Arbutin
Cell culture
In vitro in human
melanocytes
(21)
Kojic acid
1% and 2%
1) Screening
1) In vitro in model
(36)
2) Non-placebo-controlled
clinical study
2) In vivo in humans
2%, in combination with 2%
hydroquinone
Non-placebo-controlled study
In vivo in humans
(37)
Ascorbic acid
10% VC-PMG
1) Cell lines and culture;
1) In vitro mammalian
tyrosinase and
human melanoma
cells;
(41)
2) Non-placebo-controlled
clinical study
2) In vivo in humans
Abbreviations: TC, triple combination; VC-PMG, magnesium-L-ascorbyl-2-phosphate.
592
Zhai and Maibach

=== Page 610 ===
CONCLUSIONS
The treatment of pigmentation disorders can be a long process. In general, skin-whitening
agents are considered modestly effective. However, hydroquinone is still one of the most
effective agents for the treatment of hyperpigmentary disorders (59). High concentrations are
not recommended, except under a physician’s supervision. The application of hydroquinone in
combination with certain chemicals (tretinoin, salicylic acid, or corticosteroids) may enhance
lightening effects. Recently, chemical peelings with kojic acid, glycolic acid, and trichloroacetic
acid, either alone or in combination, have been widely introduced for treatment of
hyperpigmentations (57,58,60). However, the real efficacy of whitening agents should be
determined in a placebo-controlled study in humans. Non-hydroquinone agents have also
been assessed (61), and results have been encouraging. Optimal whitening agents remain a
future goal. Recent review of the mechanism and biological, chemical, and clinical aspects of
lightening agents provides additional insights (62–64).
REFERENCES
1. Grimes PE. Disorders of pigmentation: global issues of major cosmetic concern. West J Med 1998;
169(4):226–227.
2. Grimes PE. Melasma. Etiologic and therapeutic considerations. Arch Dermatol 1995; 131(12):
1453–1457.
3. Gupta AK, Gover MD, Nouri K, et al. The treatment of melasma: a review of clinical trials. J Am Acad
Dermatol 2006; 55(6):1048–1065.
4. Zhai H, Maibach HI. Skin-whitening products. In: Paye M, Barel AO, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of
Cosmetic Science and Technology, 2nd ed. New York: Taylor & Francis, 2006:457–463.
5. Engasser PG, Maibach HI. Cosmetic and dermatology: bleaching creams. J Am Acad Dermatol 1981;
5(2):143–147.
6. Jimbow K, Obata H, Pathak MA, et al. Mechanism of depigmentation by hydroquinone. J Invest
Dermatol 1974; 62(4):436–449.
7. Arndt KA, Fitzpatrick TB. Topical use of hydroquinone as a depigmenting agent. JAMA 1965;
194(9):965–967.
8. Fitzpatrick TB, Arndt KA, el-Mofty AM, et al. Hydroquinone and psoralens in the therapy of
hypermelanosis and vitiligo. Arch Dermatol 1966; 93(5):589–600.
9. Kligman AM, Willis I. A new formula for depigmenting human skin. Arch Dermatol 1975; 111(1):
40–48.
10. Gano SE, Garcia RL. Topical tretinoin, hydroquinone, and betamethasone valerate in the therapy of
melasma. Cutis 1979; 23(2):239–241.
11. Menter A. Rationale for the use of topical corticosteroids in melasma. J Drugs Dermatol 2004; 3(2):
169–174.
12. Gellin GA, Maibach HI, Misiaszek MH, et al. Detection of environmental depigmenting substances.
Contact Dermatitis 1979; 5(4):201–213.
13. Pathak MA, Fitzpatrick TB, Kraus EW. Usefulness of retinoic acid in the treatment of melasma. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4 pt 2):894–899.
14. Sanchez JL, Vazquez M. A hydroquinone solution in the treatment of melasma. Int J Dermatol 1982;
21(1):55–58.
15. Vazquez M, Sanchez JL. The efficacy of a broad-spectrum sunscreen in the treatment of melasma.
Cutis 1983; 32(1):92, 95–96.
16. Clarys P, Barel A. Efficacy of topical treatment of pigmentation skin disorders with plant
hydroquinone glucosides as assessed by quantitative color analysis. J Dermatol 1998; 25(6):412–414.
17. Haddad AL, Matos LF, Brunstein F, et al. A clinical, prospective, randomized, double-blind trial
comparing skin whitening complex with hydroquinone vs. placebo in the treatment of melasma. Int
J Dermatol 2003; 42:153–156.
18. Grimes PE. A microsponge formulation of hydroquinone 4% and retinol 0.15% in the treatment of
melasma and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. Cutis 2004; 74(6):362–368.
19. Espinal-Perez LE, Moncada B, Castanedo-Cazares JP. A double-blind randomized trial of 5% ascorbic
acid vs. 4% hydroquinone in melasma. Int J Dermatol 2004; 43(8):604–607.
20. Ferreira Cestari T, Hassun K, Sittart A, et al. A comparison of triple combination cream and
hydroquinone 4% cream for the treatment of moderate to severe facial melasma. J Cosmet Dermatol
2007; 6(1):36–39.
Skin-Whitening Agents
593

=== Page 611 ===
21. Maeda K, Fukuda M. Arbutin: mechanism of its depigmenting action in human melanocyte culture.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1996; 276(2):765–769.
22. Grimes PE. Vitiligo. An overview of therapeutic approaches. Dermatol Clin 1993; 11(2):325–338.
23. Levin CY, Maibach H. Exogenous ochronosis. An update on clinical features, causative agents and
treatment options. Am J Clin Dermatol 2001; 2(4):213–217.
24. Friedlander BR, Hearne FT, Newman BJ. Mortality, cancer incidence, and sickness-absence in
photographic processors: an epidemiologic study. J Occup Med 1982; 24(8):605–613.
25. Pifer JW, Hearne FT, Swanson FA, et al. Mortality study of employees engaged in the manufacture
and use of hydroquinone. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 1995; 67(4):267–280.
26. English JC, Hill T, O’Donoghue JL, et al. Measurement of nuclear DNA modification by 32P-
postlabeling in the kidneys of male and female Fischer 344 rats after multiple gavage doses of
hydroquinone. Fundam Appl Toxicol 1994; 23(3):391–396.
27. English JC, Perry LG, Vlaovic M, et al. Measurement of cell proliferation in the kidneys of Fischer 344
and Sprague-Dawley rats after gavage administration of hydroquinone. Fundam Appl Toxicol 1994;
23(3):397–406.
28. Gocke E, King MT, Eckhardt K, et al. Mutagenicity of cosmetics ingredients licensed by the European
Communities. Mutat Res 1981; 90(2):91–109.
29. Whysner J, Verna L, English JC, et al. Analysis of studies related to tumorigenicity induced by
hydroquinone. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 1995; 21(1):158–176.
30. Colinas RJ, Burkart PT, Lawrence DA. In vitro effects of hydroquinone, benzoquinone, and
doxorubicin on mouse and human bone marrow cells at physiological oxygen partial pressure.
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1994; 129(1):95–102.
31. Bucks DA, McMaster JR, Guy RH, et al. Percutaneous absorption of hydroquinone in humans: effect
of 1-dodecylazacycloheptan-2-one (azone) and the 2-ethylhexyl ester of 4-(dimethylamino)benzoic
acid (Escalol 507). J Toxicol Environ Health 1988; 24(3):279–289.
32. Wester RC, Melendres J, Hui X, et al. Human in vivo and in vitro hydroquinone topical
bioavailability, metabolism, and disposition. J Toxicol Environ Health A 1998; 54(4):301–317.
33. Nakagawa M, Kawai K, Kawai K. Contact allergy to kojic acid in skin care products. Contact
Dermatitis 1995; 32(1):9–13.
34. Cabanes J, Chazarra S, Garcia-Carmona F. Kojic acid, a cosmetic skin whitening agent, is a slow-
binding inhibitor of catecholase activity of tyrosinase. J Pharm Pharmacol 1994; 46(12):982–985.
35. Kahn V. Effect of kojic acid on the oxidation of DL-DOPA, norepinephrine, and dopamine by
mushroom tyrosinase. Pigment Cell Res 1995; 8(5):234–240.
36. Majmudar G, Jacob G, Laboy Y, et al. An in vitro method for screening skin-whitening products.
J Cosmet Sci 1998; 49:361–367.
37. Lim JT. Treatment of melasma using kojic acid in a gel containing hydroquinone and glycolic acid.
Dermatol Surg 1999; 25(4):282–284.
38. Shibuya T, Murota T, Sakamoto K, et al. Mutagenicity and dominant lethal test of kojic acid—Ames
test, forward mutation test in cultured Chinese hamster cells and dominant lethal test in mice.
J Toxicol Sci 1982; 7(4):255–262.
39. Abdel-Hafez SI, Shoreit AA. Mycotoxins producing fungi and mycoflora of air-dust from Taif, Saudi
Arabia. Mycopathologia 1985; 92(2):65–71.
40. Fujimoto N, Watanabe H, Nakatani T, et al. Induction of thyroid tumours in (C57BL/6N x C3H/N)F1
mice by oral administration of kojic acid. Food Chem Toxicol 1998; 36(8):697–703.
41. Kameyama K, Sakai C, Kondoh S, et al. Inhibitory effect of magnesium L-ascorbyl-2-phosphate (VC-
PMG) on melanogenesis in vitro and in vivo. J Am Acad Dermatol 1996; 34(1):29–33.
42. Nomura H, Ishiguro T, Morimoto S. Studies on L-ascorbic acid derivatives. II. L-Ascorbic acid
3-phosphate and 3-pyrophosphate. Chem Pharm Bull 1969; 17(2):381–386.
43. Nomura H, Ishiguro T, Morimoto S. Studies on L-ascorbic acid derivatives. 3. Bis(L-ascorbic acid-3,3’)
phosphate and L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate. Chem Pharm Bull 1969; 17(2):387–393.
44. Morisaki K, Ozaki S. Design of novel hybrid vitamin C derivatives: thermal stability and biological
activity. Chem Pharm Bull 1996; 44(9):1647–1655.
45. Villarama CD, Maibach HI. Glutathione as a depigmenting agent: an overview. Int J Cosmet Sci 2005;
27(3):147–153.
46. Piamphongsant T. Treatment of melasma: a review with personal experience. Int J Dermatol 1998;
37(12):897–903.
47. Funasaka Y, Chakraborty AK, Komoto M, et al. The depigmenting effect of alpha-tocopheryl ferulate
on human melanoma cells. Br J Dermatol 1999; 141(1):20–29.
48. Kobayashi R, Takisada M, Suzuki T, et al. Neoagarobiose as a novel moisturizer with whitening effect.
Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 1997; 61(1):162–163.
49. Schmaus G, Vielhaber G, Jacobs K, et al. 4-(1-Phenylethyl) 1,3-benzenediol: a new highly potent
lightening agent. J Cosmet Sci 2006; 57(2):197–198.
594
Zhai and Maibach

=== Page 612 ===
50. Ando H, Ryu A, Hashimoto A, et al. Linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid lightens ultraviolet-
induced hyperpigmentation of the skin. Arch Dermatol Res 1998; 290(7):375–381.
51. Fleischer AB Jr., Schwartzel EH, Colby SI, et al. The combination of 2% 4-hydroxyanisole (Mequinol)
and 0.01% tretinoin is effective in improving the appearance of solar lentigines and related
hyperpigmented lesions in two double-blind multicenter clinical studies. J Am Acad Dermatol 2000;
42(3):459–467.
52. Bissett DL, Robinson LR, Raleigh PS, et al. Reduction in the appearance of facial hyperpigmentation
by topical N-acetyl glucosamine. J Cosmet Dermatol 2007; 6(1):20–26.
53. Hamed SH, Sriwiriyanont P, deLong MA, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety of deoxyarbutin, a
new tyrosinase-inhibiting agent. J Cosmet Sci 2006; 57(4):291–308.
54. Shigeta Y, Imanaka H, Ando H, et al. Skin whitening effect of linoleic acid is enhanced by liposomal
formulations. Biol Pharm Bull 2004; 27(4):591–594.
55. Tengamnuay P, Pengrungruangwong K, Pheansri I, et al. Artocarpus lakoocha heartwood extract as a
novel cosmetic ingredient: evaluation of the in vitro anti-tyrosinase and in vivo skin whitening
activities. Int J Cosmet Sci 2006; 28(4):269–276.
56. Wang KH, Lin RD, Hsu FL, et al. Cosmetic applications of selected traditional Chinese herbal
medicines. J Ethnopharmacol 2006; 106(3):353–359.
57. Taylor SC, Burgess CM, Callender VD, et al. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation: evolving
combination treatment strategies. Cutis 2006; 78(2 suppl):6–19.
58. Grimes PE. The safety and efficacy of salicylic acid chemical peels in darker racial-ethnic groups.
Dermatol Surg 1999; 25(1):18–22.
59. Nordlund JJ, Grimes PE, Ortonne JP. The safety of hydroquinone. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2006;
20(7):781–787.
60. Cotellessa C, Peris K, Onorati MT, et al. The use of chemical peelings in the treatment of different
cutaneous hyperpigmentations. Dermatol Surg 1999; 25(6):450–454.
61. Levy JL, Pons F, Agopian L, et al. A double-blind controlled study of a nonhydroquinone bleaching
cream in the treatment of melasma. J Cosmet Dermatol 2005; 4(4):272–276.
62. Solano F, Briganti S, Picardo M, et al. Hypopigmenting agents: an updated review on biological,
chemical and clinical aspects. Pigment Cell Res 2006; 19(6):550–571.
63. Petit L, Pie´rard GE. Skin-lightening products revisited. Int J Cosmet Sci 2003; 25(4):169–181.
64. Parvez S, Kang M, Chung HS, et al. Survey and mechanism of skin depigmenting and lightening
agents. Phytother Res 2006; 20(11):921–934.
Skin-Whitening Agents
595

=== Page 614 ===
58
Skin Whitening: New Hydroquinone
Combination
Leslie Baumanna
University of Miami, Cosmetic Medicine and Research Institute, Miami, Florida, U.S.A.
Lucy K. Martin
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, Division of Cosmetic Dermatology, University of Miami
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, U.S.A.
DISORDERS OF PIGMENTATION
Pigmentation disorders occur as a result of an increased production of melanin by melanocytes
and/or an elevated transfer of melanosomes from melanocytes to basal and suprabasal
keratinocytes (1–3). Melanin (eumelanin and pheomelanin) results from the hydroxylation of
tyrosine to 3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) through the enzymatic action of tyrosinase
and the subsequent oxidation of DOPA to dopaquinone (4). Once produced, melanin is
transferred to keratinocytes or into the dermis via any of the following processes: (i) damage to
melanocytes in the basal layer allows for phagocytization by melanophages, releasing melanin
into the dermis; (ii) melanosomes are directly deposited, through their dendrites, into the
dermis; or (3) macrophages migrate into the epidermis where melanosomes are phagocytized,
returning them to the dermis.
Melasma
Difficult to treat, melasma, also known as chloasma or “mask of pregnancy,” is a relatively
common, chronic pigmentary condition typically seen in women of childbearing age. In fact, it
is known to appear at any time during a woman’s reproductive years and is often associated
with pregnancy or oral contraceptive use. Melasma is more common among women of darker
skin types. A small percentage of cases, approximately 10%, occur in men, most frequently in
those of Middle Eastern, Caribbean, or Asian descent.
Melasma presents as often distinctly demarcated, irregularly shaped light- to dark-brown
macules. The blotches usually appear on the upper lip, nose, cheeks, chin, forehead, and,
occasionally, the neck. A centrofacial pattern of distribution, involving the cheeks, forehead, upper
lip, nose, and chin, is the manifestation most often seen, but there are three identifiable patterns of
presentation (2,5). The mandibular pattern and the malar pattern, which affects the nose and cheeks,
are less common. Although it most often occurs in skin routinely exposed to the sun, there are
reports in the literature of melasma appearing on the nipples and around the external genitalia (6,7).
Etiology
The cause of melasma has not yet been clearly identified, but solar exposure, genetic
predisposition, and hormonal influences are considered among the most important factors
(6,7). Estrogen and progesterone, nutritional deficiency, and certain antiepilepsy drugs are
considered significant causal or aggravating factors in its development (4). Also, Hydantoin
and Dilantin have been reported to contribute to melasma in both women and men (7,8).
A history of chronic sun exposure seems to be a necessary precondition for the
development of this pigment disorder, and solar exposure is also well known to exacerbate the
condition (2,4). Interestingly, in the winter months, when sun exposure is usually less frequent,
melasma is typically less noticeable (4). In the absence of other compelling evidence, sun
exposure is considered the primary exogenous causal factor in melasma (1,9). Data suggesting
a genetic component are sparse, but a few familial cases have been reported (1).
It is not uncommon for women to develop melasma on the upper lip after hot wax
application to remove unwanted hair. In fact, this phenomenon is so often reported by patients
aFinancial conflict statement: Dr. Baumann was an investigator for Stiefel in several clinical trials.

=== Page 615 ===
that the author speculates that heat may play a role in melasma development as it does in
erythema ab igne (a reticulated erythematous hyperpigmented eruption arising after chronic
exposure to heat).
It has been observed that women who use oral contraceptives represent the population
that most often presents with melasma (6,7). This painless but often stress-inducing condition
also frequently affects pregnant women; together, women in these categories comprise the
majority of melasma cases. Occasionally, there are menopausal and premenstrual presenta-
tions associated with melasma. The low incidence of melasma among postmenopausal women
on estrogen replacement therapy suggests that estrogen alone is an unlikely etiological root (4).
This is a highly idiopathic condition, varying from patient to patient, within individuals, and
even from pregnancy to pregnancy (4). It is also characterized by a high degree of recalcitrance.
Melasma may subside in the months following a patient’s pregnancy or after discontinuing
oral contraceptives, but may still persist, taking up to five years to resolve (7,8). An endocrine
etiology has been posited by some (7), but no such mechanism has yet been proved (8). Some
ovarian disorders are also correlated with an increased incidence of melasma, but no causal
link has been established. The odds of experiencing initial onset of melasma are lower than the
likelihood of recurrence once melasma has developed.
OTHER PIGMENTATION DISORDERS
Solar Lentigos
Long-standing data suggest that as many as 90% of elderly patients have one or more solar
lentigos (10). Sun exposure, as the name suggests, is responsible for this condition, which is
characterized by macular brown lesions usually 1 cm in diameter. Acute or chronic exposure to
the sun can induce solar lentigos. The face and backs of hands are the areas most often affected.
This condition is resistant to the Kligman formula (11).
Post-Inflammatory Hyperpigmentation
Various skin conditions, such as acne, eczema, and allergic responses, can lead to post-
inflammatory hyperpigmentation, also known as post-inflammatory pigment alteration
(PIPA), as can more serious cutaneous events, such as burns, surgeries, and trauma. Certain
treatments for skin disease or cosmetic conditions can also engender or exacerbate
discoloration (e.g., chemical peels and laser resurfacing). PIPA can occur in any skin type,
but it most often affects people with darker skin types (12–14). The condition results from an
elevation in melanin synthesis in response to a cutaneous attack and can be diffused or
localized—its distribution depends on the location of the original insult to the skin.
PIPA presents in areas of previous inflammation as irregular, darkly pigmented
splotches (15). Any area of the skin can be involved, but the disorder is especially stressful to
patients when it occurs in the face. Not surprisingly then, PIPA is one of the most common
conditions prompting patients to visit a dermatologist. PIPA unfortunately tends to recur in
susceptible individuals (16).
Treatment
The goals of therapy are to slow the proliferation of melanocytes, inhibit the formation of
melanosomes, and promote the degradation of melanosomes (17). Sun-protective behavior is a
necessity. As such, patients must use a good high sun protection factor (SPF) sunscreen with
UVA protection and make all reasonable efforts to avoid sun exposure. The sunscreen should
be worn 24 hours a day. Other practical, behavioral elements of therapy can include UVA
screens for car and home windows and protective clothing such as hats.
The Kligman Formula
The “Kligman formula” is a mixture consisting of 0.1% tretinoin, 5.0% hydroquinone, 0.1%
dexamethasone, and hydrophilic ointment (11). The daily application of this combination
through five to seven weeks resulted in normalized pigmentation of normal adult skin in black
males treated for melasma, ephelides, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. The removal
of one component of the therapeutic regimen resulted in less-efficacious results. The formula,
598
Baumann and Martin

=== Page 616 ===
which has been very popular as a therapeutic option for melasma since its introduction in 1975,
is not commercially available now, but can be formulated by a pharmacy. Unfortunately, the
stability of these products formulated in a pharmacy is in question. This is because
hydroquinone and tretinoin have a tendency to interact and decrease each other’s effective-
ness. However, the popularity of the Kligman formula led to the status of topical combination
therapy as the current mainstay of melasma treatment and resulted in the development of Tri-
Luma (discussed later in this chapter) in which tretinoin and hydroquinone have been
successfully stabilized.
Other Topical Components
The standard products used to produce hypopigmentation include phenolic and nonphenolic
derivatives. Hydroquinone and hydroquinone combination formulations are among the
phenolic group; tretinoin and azelaic acid are among the nonphenolic agents (18). Typical
topical preparations include hydroquinone 2% to 4%, low-potency steroids, kojic acid,
deoxyarbutin, azelaic acid, hydroxy acids, and retinoids. Tretinoin 0.1% has been evaluated as
a single agent in the treatment of melasma and favorably reviewed (19,20), but such
monotherapy took as long as 10 months, in one study, before the condition improved. A 10-
month, randomized, vehicle-controlled clinical study did show that topical 0.1% tretinoin
lightened melasma in 28 black patients, with only mild side effects (20). Combination therapy
has been considered the mainstay therapy for patients with any skin type, though.
Although most of the remaining discussion here will focus on recent research with a
novel combination compound, it is worth noting that other tools in the dermatological
armamentarium have achieved favorable results. For example, the addition of glycolic acid to
hydroquinone has been shown to promote efficacy by facilitating the penetration of both
agents (21). A recently evaluated cream containing 10% buffered glycolic acid, 4%
hydroquinone, vitamins C and E, and sunscreen has also been shown to be safe and effective
in the treatment of melasma (22). In combination with topical agents, glycolic acid peels and/
or Jessner’s peels can be used to accelerate the resolution of melasma. Jessner’s solution and
70% glycolic acid (combined with tretinoin and hydroquinone between peels) have been
shown to work equally well in the treatment of melasma (23).
Kojic acid has also been demonstrated to enhance the efficacy of topical agents. A study
in Singapore followed 40 Chinese women treated with 2% kojic acid in a gel containing 10%
glycolic acid and 2% hydroquinone on one half of the face and the same application without
kojic acid on the other half (24). Patients were observed for 12 weeks, and they showed
improvement in melasma on both sides of the face. The side treated with the combination
containing kojic acid showed greater improvement, it should be noted. The melasma cleared in
24 of the 40 patients who received kojic acid as compared with 19 of 40 patients treated with
the gel without kojic acid.
It is also worth noting that laser therapy has been used with some degree of effectiveness
in treating several pigmentary disorders, but has not yet been established as a first-line therapy
for melasma (18). However, the Fraxel laser is frequently used in light- and dark-skinned
patients after topical melasma regimens have failed or in combination with topical regimens.
A PRESCRIPTION COMBINATION THERAPY: TRI-LUMA
Tri-Luma is a combination of tretinoin 0.05% (retin A), hydroquinone 4.0%, and fluocinolone
acetonide 0.01% (a mild steroid). Two 8-week, multicenter, randomized, investigator-blind
studies were conducted to compare the efficacy and safety of this triple-combination
hydrophilic cream formulation with various dual-combination agents. The same drug
concentrations and vehicles were used in all formulations. The dual combinations included
tretinoin plus hydroquinone, tretinoin plus fluocinolone acetonide, and hydroquinone plus
fluocinolone acetonide.
The theoretical basis for this formulation rests on the prior success of the various first-
line components in dual-combination therapies, namely, hydroquinone, tretinoin, and a range
of topical corticosteroids. Of particular conceptual importance in the product development are
the clinical and experimental data demonstrating the effects of tretinoin and other retinoids in
abrogating the epidermal atrophy that can be induced by topical corticosteroids (25,26).
Skin Whitening: New Hydroquinone Combination
599

=== Page 617 ===
A total of 641 predominantly white female adults (ranging in age from 21 to 75 years)
were randomized to the various treatment groups. In both studies, all formulations were
applied once daily, at night. Patients enrolled in the study represented Fitzpatrick skin types I
through IV and exhibited moderate-to-severe hyperpigmentation.
Results
Significantly more of the patients treated with Tri-Luma (26.1%) demonstrated complete
clearing compared with the dual-combination therapy groups (4.6%) at the end of eight weeks
(27). Researchers observed complete or near complete clearing of hyperpigmentation in 77% of
the aggregate Tri-Luma group compared with 42.2% for fluocinolone acetonide, 27.3% for
tretinoin and fluocinolone acetonide, and 46.8% for tretinoin and hydroquinone. Side effects
associated with Tri-Luma were transient and mild. The most frequently occurring adverse
effects included erythema at the application site, desquamation, burning, xerosis, and pruritus.
Some authors have cautioned against the use of hydroquinone in high concentrations
because of its association with inducing ochronosis. Nevertheless, hydroquinone is the most
effective topically applied hypopigmenting agent approved by the Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) for melasma treatment (18). No ochronosis events were observed among
patients on any of the treatment regimens containing hydroquinone 4%.
The use of topical corticosteroids as therapy for melasma has also been discouraged by
some authors because of the association with skin atrophy and telangiectasia (28). In fact,
protracted use of potent topical corticosteroids is known to engender cutaneous atrophy. When
steroids are used in combination with retinoids, however, skin atrophy does not occur. Indeed,
the combination of tretinoin application with corticosteroid has been shown to ameliorate the
epidermal atrophy induced by the topical corticosteroid while not reducing its activity (26) and
is believed to reduce the risk of steroid-induced atrophy (25). The data from this study seem to
support this fact because only one patient in the dual-therapy hydroquinone and fluocinolone
acetonide group exhibited skin atrophy. Significantly, the one patient that experienced skin
atrophy did not receive tretinoin. A 12-week open-label long-term safety study showed a
similar safety profile as the previously described eight-week study (27).
The results of the two related studies suggest that the use of this triple-combination agent
may be more effective than any of the dual-combination agents in counteracting or inhibiting
the pathophysiological mechanism of melasma. Tri-Luma combines three well-established
agents in a formulation that appears to be effective and safe in the treatment of melasma. This
triple-combination topical therapy also shows favorable tolerability and represents a
significant advance in the dermatological armamentarium for melasma.
The concept of such a triple combination is also supported by another recent study.
Researchers evaluated the efficacy of a formula containing 0.1% tretinoin, 5% hydroquinone,
and 1% hydrocortisone in 25 Korean female patients with melasma recalcitrant to therapy.
Patients were evaluated before treatment, then instructed to apply hydrocortisone on their
faces for four months and were also assessed four weeks and four months after treatment.
Overall, investigators reported statistically significant depigmentation in clinical and
histological studies and increased subepidermal collagen synthesis, results that were observed
as early as four weeks after hydrocortisone treatment (29).
REGULATORY UPDATE: FDA AND HYDROQUINONE
On August 29, 2006, the FDA withdrew the September 3, 1982 tentative final monograph on
over-the-counter (OTC) skin-bleaching products and proposed that no OTC skin-bleaching
active ingredients be categorized as generally recognized as safe. Of course, prominent among
such products is hydroquinone. A final ruling has not yet been handed down. Should the FDA
follow through, thus changing the status of hydroquinone and other skin-bleaching agents, the
effect would be to reclassify such products as “new drugs,” permitting them to be used by
prescription until approval of a new drug application. Until such a ruling, however,
hydroquinone products remain available OTC, as this ingredient remains an important first-
line therapy for pigmentary disorders. As of the date of publication, a ruling by the FDA does
not appear imminent, but no timetable for a decision has been made clear.
600
Baumann and Martin

=== Page 618 ===
ALTERNATIVE WHITENING AGENTS
There are several alternatives to the use of hydroquinone as a hypopigmenting agent,
including kojic acid, as described earlier, deoxyarbutin, mulberry extract, Pycnogenol, and
vitamin C. Recently, deoxyarbutin [4-([tetrahydro-2H-pyran-2-yl]oxy)phenol] was shown in
cultured human skin cells to be less cytotoxic than hydroquinone. It was also demonstrated to
exhibit significant tyrosinase-inhibiting activity, and, on xenographs, topical application of
deoxyarbutin yielded observable skin lightening over an eight-week period. Further, in a
clinical trial, deoxyarbutin promoted the fading of pretanned skin better than hydroquinone or
no treatment, with statistically significant differences observed. Investigators concluded that
these findings collectively suggest that deoxyarbutin is a potentially effective and safe
tyrosinase inhibitor (30).
In a study conducted to investigate the in vitro effects of an 85% methanol extract of
dried Morus alba (mulberry) leaves on melanin biosynthesis, mulberroside F (moracin M-6,
30-di-O-b-D-glucopyranoside) isolated from the extract was found to inhibit the tyrosinase
activity that converts dopa to dopachrome in the biosynthetic process of melanin. Although its
activity was weaker than that of kojic acid, researchers concluded that this mulberry extract
may be viable as a whitening agent (31).
A 30-day clinical trial of 30 women with melasma in which patients were given one
25-mg tablet of Pycnogenol at each meal, three times daily, was inspired by the observed
efficacy of Pycnogenol in protecting against UV radiation. Investigators found that the average
surface area of melasma exhibited by the subjects was significantly reduced, demonstrating
that Pycnogenol could be effectively and safely used in treatment of this condition (32).
In another study in melasma patients, 16 women were instructed to apply 5% ascorbic
acid (vitamin C) cream on one side of the face and 4% hydroquinone cream on the other side
nightly for 16 weeks. Patients also applied sunscreen daily throughout the trial. Although the
hydroquinone side was associated with better subjective improvement (93% good and
excellent results vs. 62.5% for ascorbic acid), colorimetric measures indicated no statistical
differences. Further, side effects were more commonly associated with hydroquinone
(68.7% vs. 6.2%). Investigators concluded that while a better response was seen with
hydroquinone, ascorbic acid demonstrated efficacy in treating melasma while inducing far
fewer side effects, justifying its use alone or in combination therapy (33).
CONCLUSION
Many types of skin are susceptible to pigmentation disorders. Such conditions can appear
especially prominent in people with dark skin. Traditionally, disorders of pigmentation have
been refractory to treatment, frustrating patient and physician alike. Combination therapy,
including prolonged use of topical agents, sun avoidance, and, often, in-office chemical peels,
has been the mainstay. Laser treatments, with the exception of the Fraxel laser, have been of
limited success. A new topical combination therapy, Tri-Luma, has shown great promise,
though, in simplifying and improving treatment for these intractable disorders, particularly
melasma. In addition, this new combination therapy is effective, tolerable, and easy to use.
REFERENCES
1. Barankin B, Silver SG, Carruthers A. The skin in pregnancy. J Cutan Med Surg 2002; 6:236–240.
2. Sanchez NP, Pathak MA, Sato S, et al. Melasma: a clinical, light microscopic, ultrastructural, and
immunofluorescence study. J Am Acad Dermatol 1981; 4:698–710.
3. Baumann L. Cosmetic Dermatology: Principles and Practice. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2002:
63–69.
4. Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al., eds. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 5th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999:996–997.
5. Mandry Paga´n R, Sa´nchez JL. Mandibular melasma. P R Health Sci J 2000; 19:231–4.
6. Baran R, Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Cosmetic Dermatology, 2nd ed. London: Dunitz Martin Ltd.,
1998:396–397.
Skin Whitening: New Hydroquinone Combination
601

=== Page 619 ===
7. Arnold HL, Odom RB, James WD, eds. Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1990:991–994.
8. Champion RH, Burton JL, Ebling FJG, eds. Rook, Wilkinson, Ebling: Textbook of Dermatology, 5th ed.
London: Blackwell Science, 1992:1596–1597.
9. Mosher DB, Fitzpatrick TB, Ortonne J-P, et al. Hypomelanoses and hypermelanoses. In: Freedberg IM,
Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al., eds. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. Vol. 1. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill, 1999:945-1017.
10. Hodgson C. Senile lentigo. Arch Dermatol 1963; 87:197–207.
11. Kligman AM, Willis I. A new formula for depigmenting human skin. Arch Dermatol 1975; 111:40–48.
12. Burns RL, Prevost-Blank PL, Lawry MA, et al. Glycolic acid peels for postinflammatory
hyperpigmentation in black patients. Dermatol Surg 1997; 23:171–174.
13. Grimes PE, Stockton T. Pigmentary disorders in blacks. Dermatol Clin 1988; 6:271–281.
14. Ruiz-Maldonado R, Orozco-Covarrubias ML. Postinflammatory hypopigmentation and hyper-
pigmentation. Semin Cutan Med Surg 1997; 16:36–43.
15. Bulengo-Ransby SM, Griffiths CE, Kimbrough-Green CK, et al. Topical tretinoin (retinoic acid)
therapy for hyperpigmented lesions caused by inflammation of the skin in black patients. N Engl J
Med 1993; 328:1438–1443.
16. Fairley JA. Tretinoin (retinoic acid) revisited. N Engl J Med 1993; 328:1486–1487.
17. Pandya AG, Guevara IL. Disorders of hyperpigmentation. Dermatol Clin 2000; 18:91–98.
18. Grimes PE. Melasma. Etiologic and therapeutic considerations. Arch Dermatol 1995; 131:1453–1457.
19. Griffiths CE, Finkel LJ, Ditre CM, et al. Topical tretinoin (retinoic acid) improves melasma. A vehicle-
controlled, clinical trial. Br J Dermatol 1993; 129:415–421.
20. Kimbrough-Green CK, Griffiths CE, Finkel LJ, et al. Topical retinoic acid (tretinoin) for melasma in
black patients. A vehicle-controlled clinical trial. Arch Dermatol 1994; 130:727–733.
21. Lim JT, Tham SN. Glycolic acid peels in the treatment of melasma among Asian women. Dermatol
Surg 1997; 23:177–179.
22. Guevara IL, Pandya AG. Safety and efficacy of 4% hydroquinone combined with 10% glycolic acid,
antioxidants, and sunscreen in the treatment of melasma. Int J Dermatol 2003; 42:966–972.
23. Lawrence N, Cox SE, Brody HJ. Treatment of melasma with Jessner’s solution versus glycolic acid: a
comparison of clinical efficacy and evaluation of the predictive ability of Wood’s light examination.
J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997; 36:589–593.
24. Lim JT. Treatment of melasma using kojic acid in a gel containing hydroquinone and glycolic acid.
Dermatol Surg 1999; 25:282–284.
25. Kligman LH, Schwartz E, Lesnik RH, et al. Topical tretinoin prevents corticosteroid-induced atrophy
without lessening the anti-inflammatory effect. Curr Probl Dermatol 1993; 21:79–88.
26. McMichael AJ, Griffiths CE, Talwar HS, et al. Concurrent application of tretinoin (retinoic acid)
partially protects against corticosteroid-induced epidermal atrophy. Br J Dermatol 1996; 135:60–64.
27. Taylor SC, Torok H, Jones T, et al. Efficacy and safety of a new triple-combination agent for the
treatment of facial melasma. Cutis 2003; 72:67–72.
28. Giannotti B, Melli MC. Current approaches to the treatment of melasma. Clin Drug Invest 1995;
10(suppl 2):57–64.
29. Kang WH, Chun SC, Lee S. Intermittent therapy for melasma in Asian patients with combined topical
agents (retinoic acid, hydroquinone and hydrocortisone): clinical and histological studies. J Dermatol
1998; 25:587–596.
30. Hamed SH, Sriwiriyanont P, deLong MA, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety of deoxyarbutin, a
new tyrosinase-inhibiting agent. J Cosmet Sci 2006; 57:291–308.
31. Lee SH, Choi SY, Kim H, et al. Mulberroside F isolated from the leaves of Morus alba inhibits melanin
biosynthesis. Biol Pharm Bull 2002; 25:1045–1048.
32. Ni Z, Mu Y, Gulati O. Treatment of melasma with Pycnogenol. Phytother Res 2002; 16:567–571.
33. Espinal-Perez LE, Moncada B, Castanedo-Cazares JP. A double-blind randomized trial of 5% ascorbic
acid vs. 4% hydroquinone in melasma. Int J Dermatol 2004; 43:604–607.
602
Baumann and Martin

=== Page 620 ===
59
Anticellulite Products and Treatments
Andre´ O. Barel
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
Cellulite is a localized condition of subcutaneous fat and connective tissues with the typical
visual appearance of the orange peel look of the skin. Cellulite, or more correctly, gynoid
lipodystrophy (GLD) affects mostly women and rarely men and is considered as a common
aesthetic problem for many women. Cellulite appears generally after puberty and worsens
with age. There are preferential places of cellulite: buttocks, thighs, upper part of the arms,
knees, and more rarely, the lower parts of the legs and the back of the neck (Fig. 1). It is
interesting to note that these preferential cellulite sites are areas in which the typical pattern of
adipose deposition is observed (1). Although cellullite may be found in areas with excess
adipose tissue, obesity is not necessary correlated with the presence of cellulite (1).
The aims of this chapter are to describe
1.
the histological, physiological, and biochemical characteristics of subcutaneous
lipodystrophy;
2.
the different objective evaluation methods of lipodystrophy; and
3.
the different anticellulite treatments available and their efficacy.
There have been only a few review articles on cellulite published since 2000 (1–5).
CLINICAL, VISUAL, AND TACTILE SYMPTOMS OF THE SKIN WITH CELLULITE
There are some typical symptoms, partly subjective (reported by the patients) and partly
objective (observed by the investigators), which are very often reported in the case of cellulite (1).
l There is presence of the typical orange peel skin upon normal visual examination and
after pinching of the skin.
l Deep palpation of the skin reveals differences in the mobility of fat tissue: presence of
micro- and macronodules and fibrosclerosis. Sometimes there is presence of painful
subcutaneous nodules through deep palpation.
l There are irregularities in skin surface temperature as observed by thermography.
Touching the skin by hand reveals the presence of cold spots in an advanced stage.
l Clinical examination reveals venous stasis and edema.
DESCRIPTION OF THE DIFFERENT STAGES OF LIPODYSTROPHY
OF FAT TISSUES
There are different stages in the progression of cellulite. It is difficult to detect cellulite by
visual examination and by palpation at the first stages: orange peel skin is not permanently
present, only visible after pinching the skin. The clinical symptoms are clearly more visible at
later stages of cellulite: permanent orange peel, colder skin areas, diminution in mobility of fat
tissue upon palpation, and increased skin sensibility.
Skin surface contact thermographic pictures using thermographic foils give an indication
of the degree of cellulite, as the skin surface temperature correlates to some extent with the
clinical symptoms of cellulite. On the basis of these thermographic patterns and clinical
symptoms, Curri and coworkers proposed a classification of cellulite in four stages (6–11), a
classification that has been confirmed by others (12–14). In normal adipose tissues, a fine mesh

=== Page 621 ===
of blood vessels and lymph vessels supplies this adipose tissue with the necessary nutrients
and oxygen and takes care of the removal of the metabolized products. In the early stage of
cellulite (stage 1), the capillary blood vessels walls become more permeable, causing leakage of
blood plasma from the vessels in between the adipose tissues, which cause an edema in the
adipose tissues. In addition probably, problems with the lymph circulation hampers removal
of accumulating fluids. The aggregation of adipose cells and the amplification of the fibrillar
network of collagen bundles interconnecting the adipose cells hamper blood circulation,
leading to some hemostase (stage 2).
Adipose cells aggregates into “micronodules” surrounded by a less-mobile collagen
fibers (stage 3). The size of these micronodules is of the order of millimeters. Finally, many of
these micronodules aggregate into “macronodules” with larger sizes (2–20 mm) (stage 4). As
nerves may be squeezed by these larger nodules, persons with severe cellulite often suffer
from a sensitive to painful skin.
Stages 1, 2, and 3 of lipodystrophy are not considered clinically as pathological
symptoms but more as aesthetic-cosmetic problems of the skin. Only in stage 4, some clinical
symptoms such as an increased skin sensitivity, extensive fibrosclerosis of connective tissue,
and very advanced edema are considered as light pathology symptoms. Furthermore, it is
believed that the first stages are more or less reversible, whereas the latters stages are almost
irreversible and consequently very difficult to treat.
ETIOLOGY OF CELLULITE
Cellulite is probably a multicausal condition, and many hypotheses have been proposed
regarding the origin of fat lipodystrophy (1–5).
There is sexual differentiation in the histological distribution of subcutaneous fat lobules
in women and in men. The differences between the sexes can be found in the structure of the
Figure 1
Preferential localizations of subcutaneous lipodys-
trophy in women.
604
Barel

=== Page 622 ===
septal connective fat tissue. In women, one observes a higher percentage of septa perpendic-
ular to the skin surface and a smaller percentage parallel to the surface as shown in men.
Furthermore, in women with cellulite, deep indentations of adipose tissue into the skin were
recorded. Using in vivo high frequency ultrasound imaging, Querleux et al. (15), Lucassen
et al. (16), and Nuijs and Van Herk (17) confirmed an irregular dermo-hypodermal interface in
women with cellulite. Mirrashed et al. (18) and Querleux (19) confirmed by magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) the existence of indentations of adipose tissue into the dermis. Also
observed in women with cellulite was an increase in the thickness of the inner fat layer, a
higher percentage of septa in the direction perpendicular to the skin surface. Since cellulite is
widely present in women, some authors consider cellulite as a secondary sexual characteristic.
Although cellulite is not always synonymous with overweight, there is clearly a relation
between cellulite and hypertrophy of fat tissues.
Vascular Modifications
These consist in alterations in the microvascular network (mostly venous blood circulation) in
the fat tissue leading to a venous stasis (1,2,5). The superficial microcirculation appears to be
less efficient, and this results in subcutaneous edema because of the altered permeability of
blood vessels and the presence of plasmatic exsudate in the subcutaneous connective tissue.
This edema is probably a noninflammatory symptom. However, other authors have suggested
an inflammatory basis for its pathophysiology (2). Furthermore, alterations in the reticular
fibrillar network surrounding the blood vessels and adipocytes are observed. This
fibrosclerosis provokes stiffening and decrease in mobility of fibers. Also, alterations in the
interstitial fundamental substance (proteoglycans) are reported. GLD is probably associated
with chronic venous problems. Venous insufficiency shows typical symptoms such as possible
presence of telangiectasias, heaviness in the legs, cramps in the lower limbs, pain on deep
palpation of the skin, and irregularities in skin surface temperature as detected by
thermographic examination.
Alterations in the Matricial-Interstitial Unit Surrounding the Fat Cells (1)
The matricial-interstitial unit is formed by fibroblasts (synthesis of macromolecules of the
cellular matrix), by the collagen, elastin, and reticular fiber, and by the ground substance
(proteoglycans, glycoproteins). Alterations in the structure of the GAG (glycosyl amino glycan)
in the perivascular tissues provoke hyperpolymerization and an increase in their hydrophilicity
and the interstitial osmotic pressure: edema and hypoxia. Ryan and Curri (9,10) suggested the
hypothesis of an increase in water content of subcutaneous adipose tissue in case of cellulite. An
increase in the concentration of glycosyl amino glycans, presumably leading to a rise in the
amount of water retained in the skin, was suggested. Querleux et al. (15) did not confirm the
hypothesis of increased water content in the adipose tissue of women with cellulite except if
such water would be located in the connective septa. Modifications in the structure of the
proteins of the cellular matrix are observed: alterations of the fibers are followed by sclerosis.
Predisposing Factors
A genetic prediposition factor plays an important role in the development of cellulite (1). More
controversial is the observation that white Caucasians tend to have more cellulite than Asians.
Also, it appears that Latin women develop more GLD on the hips and thighs than Nordic
women (the sale of anticellulite creams and treatments are very much in favor in the
Mediterranean countries). A nonbalanced diet with excessive intake of fats and carbohydrates
provokes the hypertrophy of fat tissues. A sedentary lifestyle contributes to the aggravation of
cellulite, and wearing tight clothes makes venous return more difficult. Smoking provokes
alterations in the microcirculation and could favor the formation of cellulite. Other coexisting
disorders (hormonal, circulatory, metabolic, gynecologic, nepheotic, and gastrointestinal) may
be important and contribute to the development of cellulite.
Modifications and Hypertrophy of Adipose Tissues
Although cellulite is not always synonymous with overweight (some lean persons could
present symptoms of cellulite), there is a relation between cellulite and hypertrophy of fat
Anticellulite Products and Treatments
605

=== Page 623 ===
tissues. First, there is formation of first micronodules and later of macronodules in adipose
tissues.
The combined effect of modifications and hypertrophy of adipose issues, alterations in
the fibrillar connective tissue, and alterations in the microvascular venous network leads
always to the presence of cellulite.
New developments in the aethiopathogenesis of cellulite have recently been described
(5). It appears that three main theories on the aethiopathogenesis of cellulite have emerged.
These theories indicate the following problems in the edematofibrosclerotic panniculitis (EFP):
1.
A different anatomical conformation of subcutaneous tissue in women compared
with men
2.
A microcirculatory modification
3.
An edema resulting from excessive hydropholia in the intercellular matrix
New developments have clearly emphasized the limitations of the three above-described
theories. It appears that adipose tissue does not play a significant role in the onset of cellulite: it
participates only as a pure inert physical function, producing mechanical tension through its
hypertrophy. Today we know that the adipose organ performs complex functions by acting as
a system controlling the systemic energy balance, by modulating the food intake and the
metabolism of other tissues, and as a glandular system for multiple hormonal secretions. It is
known that adipose tissue is able to modulate the blood flowing through it and can secrete
numerous substances with the power to regulate the activity of the endothelial cells. In
conclusion, these recently identified properties of the adipose tissue are also involved in the
pathogenesis of cellulite (5).
OBJECTIVE EVALUATION OF THE SYMPTOMS OF GYNOID LIPODYSTROPHY
There is a variety of physical and pharmacological anticellulite treatments ranging from topical
products to oral food supplements or regimens, from manual to mechanical massage, laser,
infrared light, continuous or pulsed radio frequencies, etc.
As a consequence of this, there is a need for accurate, sensitive, noninvasive
bioengineering methods for the quantitative evaluation of the degree of cellulite (particularly
at early stages) and for the objective evaluation of the efficacy of various cosmetic treatments
(2–5,14). However, the clinical evaluation of cellulite based either on direct visual examination
and palpation of the orange peel skin with a diminution of the mobility of the hypodermis or
photograding of photographic pictures taken under well-standardized conditions remain
important. The visual evaluation is more closely related to the consumer’s considerations and
expectations.
The different noninvasive bioengineering measurements are as follows:
l Contact skin surface thermographic measurements using liquid crystals.
l Noncontact skin surface thermography of skin surface using infrared video camera.
l Micro blood circulation using laser Doppler image analysis.
l Ultrasonic skin analysis of skin density. Measurement of thickness of the hypodermis
at 10 to 14 MHz and measurement of the surface of the interface between dermis and
hypodermis at 20 MHz.
l MRI.
l Skin surface topographical imaging and fringe projection analysis.
l Macroscopic normal and digitalized photographic pictures of the skin surface.
In many studies, there is a confusion between obesity and cellulite (although adipous
volume is clearly an aggravating factor for cellulite). Many patients confuse weight gain with
the appearance of cellulite, and many commercial anticellulite treatments are in fact slimming
treatments. As a consequence of this confusion, the use of antropometric measurements is
widely applied to measure the efficacy of the various anti–weight treatments: circumference
measurements of hip, both thighs, and individual.
606
Barel

=== Page 624 ===
Skin Surface Contact Thermography Using Encapsulated Liquid Crystals in the
Evaluation of Cellulite
The principle of the encapsulated cholesteric liquid crystal contact thermography consists of
different color plates presenting a pattern of different colors corresponding to about 38C
temperature. Application of the color sheet with uniform pressure on the skin surface and
photographic recording of the thermographic pattern using a photographic camera can be
made. A qualitative global analysis of the thermographic pictures in relation with the different
stages of cellulite can be made (14,20–24). A cellulite-free skin surface thermography shows a
uniform color pattern without hypothermic and hyperthermic areas. A cellulite skin surface
thermography shows a nonuniform color pattern with the presence of hypothermic (cold
spots) and hyperthermic (warm spots) areas. Quantitative analysis of the thermographic
pictures can also be carried out by image analysis. Computerized color image analysis gives
the mean temperature of the thermogram and respectively the number and the percentage area
of the hypo- and hyperthermic areas present on a well-defined skin area. As experimentally
observed, an anticellulite treatment will induce an increase in the mean temperature of the skin
surface and a decrease in the percentage hypothermic zones (with a concomitant increase in
the percentage hyperthermic zones).
This method is rapid, easy to use, and non-expensive for screening subjects for cellulite
and for confirmation of the clinical diagnosis.
However, considering the low accuracy and reproducibility of the photographic pictures,
quantitative image analysis of the thermograms is very difficult. One observes large
interindividual variations in skin surface temperature (large number of subjects is necessary
in a study) and long acclimatization time for temperature equilibrium of the skin (influence of
external temperature). This method remains a qualitative testing of cellulite at different stages.
Skin Surface Thermography Using Infrared Thermal Imaging System in the Evaluation
of Cellulite
Using an infrared video camera, an infrared thermal image of the skin surface is obtained in a
noninvasive manner. The thermographic picture can be quantitatively analyzed (14,22,23).
In the validation of this infrared video imaging technique, the problems encountered
with liquid crystals are same as those with the contact thermography, such as large
interindividual variations in skin surface temperature, long acclimatization time for temper-
ature equilibrium of the skin, and influence of external temperature.
Laser Doppler Imaging System in the Evaluation of Cellulite
Using a laser Doppler perfusion imager, an image of the superficial blood circulation can be
obtained. The He-Ne laser light emitting at 633 nm has a penetration power in the skin of only
about 300 mm (14,22,23).
This instrument measures the superficial blood flux of the skin (papillary dermis). The
blood perfusion of the deeper layers of the skin such as the hypodermis cannot be measured
with this technique. However, a high correlation is obtained between the skin surface
thermographic pictures and the laser Doppler imaging system when studying skin with
cellulite. However, the measurements are delicate (long measuring times during which the
volunteer must remain immobile).
Ultrasonic Imaging of the Skin in the Evaluation of Cellulite
High-frequency ultrasound C-mode imaging (10–20 MHz) appears to be a promising method.
This noninvasive method has been frequently used both clinically and in research for studying
the epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis (24–35). Different authors have used the technique of
the measurement of the thickness of the subcutaneous fatty layer using ultrasound imaging at
10 to 14 MHz (27–35); however, the determination of the echographic border line between
subcutaneous fat and connective tissues/muscles is very delicate. As a consequence, the
determination of the mean thickness of the hypodermis is not very accurate. The interface
between the dermis and the subcutaneous fat can be measured using ultrasound imaging at
20 MHz (16,17). The interface between the echogenic epidermis-dermis and the hypoechoic
subcutaneous fat is clearly visible, allowing measurements of skin thickness and the surface of
this border.
Anticellulite Products and Treatments
607

=== Page 625 ===
In normal cellulite-free skin, the interface between the dermis and the fat tissue is
irregular but rather smooth. In skin with cellulite, this surface is not smooth and very irregular.
The surface of this interface is quantified and can be used as a measure of the degree of
cellulite. Quantification of the surface of the interface between the dermis and the hypodermis
(fat tissue) is possible and can be considered as a measure of the extent of cellulite (16).
Measurement of Skin Surface Topography
Cellulite skin surface presents irregularities (orange peel skin). In principle, the classical skin
surface roughness measurements, which are used in cosmetic research, could be applied for
studying cellulite. These involve stylus profilometry, image analysis by shadow method and
optical focus laser profilometry, topographical skin imaging techniques, and fringe projections
analysis (36–42). Stylus profilometry measurements are carried out on soft or hard skin replicas
of general small size (2–3 cm2 area) and have a limited vertical range of roughness capability
(maximum 400–500 mm). These techniques are well suited for the determination of the
microrelief of the skin surface (50–200 mm), but not for assessing the skin surface with cellulite.
Optical focus laser profilometry and fringe projections analysis can be carried directly on the
skin surface. The macrorelief of the skin surface can also be evaluated using an optical
triangular laser profilometry. This method involves measurements on large size soft replicas
with an extended vertical range of skin irregularities (up to 8–10 mm). Quantification of the
skin surface macrorelief involves a computerized correction for the curvature of the skin
surface with cellulite. Actually the skin surface topography of skin with cellulite could be more
easily evaluated using 3-D topographical skin imaging techniques and 3-D map topography
from fringe projections.
Digital Photographic Pictures of the Skin Surface
The macrorelief of the skin can be evaluated by taking digital photographic pictures under
standardized experimental conditions (with tangential lighting) (1,4). These photographic
pictures are then graded visually using numerical scales in double-blind manner by expert
independent reviewers for the intensity of cellulite and the efficacy of various anticellulite
treatments (43–45). Macroscopic digitalized video pictures (with the use of a CCD camera) of
the external part of the thighs were taken after application of a gripping system around the
thigh to increase the orange peel look of the skin.
In Vivo Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy
Recently, high-resolution MRI and localized spectroscopy data were published (15,18,19),
allowing investigation of subcutaneous adipose tissue in men and in women with and without
cellulite. As previously mentioned in this chapter, MRI is very efficient for measuring the
thickness, surface, and volume of the adipose tissue. In women with cellulite, an increase in
skin thickness and presence of deep indentations of adipose tissue into the skin were noticed.
Unfortunately, because of the high cost and limited accessibility of this instrument, this
promising technique will not be available for cellulite research for most laboratories and
cosmetic companies.
TREATMENTS OF CELLULITE
There are numerous therapies that have been advertised and employed to treat cellulite (1,2,4).
Despite the multitude of therapeutic approaches, there is little scientific evidence that any of
these treatments really work. A majority of the evidence is anecdotal, subjective, or based upon
patient self-evaluation. Only a few anticellulite treatments are validated using noninvasive
bioengineering measurements to quantify the degree of cellulite.
The Physiotherapeutic Treatments
Physiotherapeutic treatments such as deep massage and manual and pneumatic lymph drainage
stimulate the blood and lymph microcirculation and increase the removal of the extra fluid in the
adipose tissues. In addition, these massage techniques will retard the further development of
fibrosclerosis and the aggregation of fat cells in nodules. These physiotherapeutic treatments are
generally combined with the topical use of anticellulite dermato-cosmetic products (during
608
Barel

=== Page 626 ===
massage or pre- or post-massage). Electrolipolysis and mesotherapy are invasive medical
treatments of cellulite; these techniques will not be described in this chapter.
Recently, two new physiotherapeutic techniques have been developed in the treatment of
cellulite (46,47). One technique combines the use of near-infrared laser light of a continuous
radiofrequency wave and mechanical suction (2 rollers with suction), and another instrument
combines near-infrared light with a mechanical massage apparatus. These combined
physiotherapeutic instruments seem to improve the symptoms of cellulite.
The Topical Dermato-Cosmetic Products
The use of various topical products, generally applied with massage, in the treatment of
cellulite and/or as slimming is known for many years (1,2,4). The most used pharmacological
topic agents are xanthines, retinoids, and plant extracts. A novel approach to topical
anticellulite treatments consists of combining the topical application of the pharmacological
product under occlusion as enhancement (bioceramic-coated neoprene short) (48).
Xanthines are common ingredients used in anticellulite products (caffeine, aminophyl-
line, theophylline, or plant extracts rich in xanthines) (1–4,45). Xanthines are used because of
their proposed effect on adipocyte lipolysis via the inhibition of phosphoesterase, provoking
an increase in AMP. In vitro metabolism studies on fat cells have shown that caffeine could
slow down the lipogenesis (uptake of glucose and free fatty acids to synthesize triglycerides)
and stimulate the lipolysis (degradation of triglycerides and release of the free fatty acids) in
different ways. Furthermore, it appears that caffeine increases the level of a class of uncoupling
proteins (UCP) in subcutaneous white adipous tissue adipocytes and may help to reduce the
adipose tissue mass.
Retinoids
The use of topical retinol to improve cellulite was proposed by Kligman et al. (49,50), and they
demonstrated an improvement in cellulite. Retinol will be metabolized to retinoic acid. These
effects may be due to the known effects of retinoids in the dermis modifying the collagen fibers
and the network of elastic fibers (1–5). It can be also noted that retinol has an “anti-adipocyte”
activity by reducing the differentiation of adipocyte precursor cells in adipocytes (4).
Plant Extracts
The use of plant extracts such as Centella asiatica, butcher’s broom, horse chesnut, ivy, Ginkgo
biloba, Witch hazel, white oak, green tea, lemon, kola, fennel, alguae, barley, strawberry,
marjoram, sweet clover, aloe vera, etc. should be noted. The “active” molecules of these plant
extracts are probably flavonoids (rutins, rutinosides) or terpenes (ginkgolides).
These slimming/anticellulite plant extracts present properties of stimulation of the
peripheral blood circulation and lymph circulation and inhibit further the fibrosclerosis of the
fat surrounding collagen matrix. Various algae species such as fucus vesiculosus, laminaria
flexicaulis, and ascophyllum nodosum are incorporated in anticellulite cosmetic preparations
for their hypothetical beneficial effect on the skin surface. There are very few in vivo
scientifically reported studies examining the effects of these plant extracts improving the
condition of cellulite (4). The use of anticellulite creams containing various plant extracts seems
to be acceptably safe (51); however, the risk for adverse allergic reaction must be taken into
account.
ORAL TREATMENTS
Many of the above-mentioned active ingredients are also used in oral anticellulite or slimming
treatments of cellulite, and similar to the topical treatments, there are very few scientifically
proven clinical studies reported (2–4). These preparations contain mostly various plant extracts
and xanthines (caffeine or plant extracts rich in caffeine). These anticellulite food supplements
can be used alone or in combination with massage and/or topical creams. The use of plant
extracts such as green tea, grape, Ginkgo biloba, and centella asiatica are particularly noticed. It
is possible that both oral and topical routes may have a synergic effect and may be the best way
to ameliorate the symptoms of cellulite (4).
Anticellulite Products and Treatments
609

=== Page 627 ===
CONCLUSIONS
Very few anticellulite studies that were performed under well-controlled experimental
conditions (double-blind, vehicle-controlled, etc.) and under medical and paramedical
supervision are published in the scientific literature (1–5,14).
After a critical overview of these published clinical studies, one can make the following
remarks. In the case of simple trials (such as one with treated thigh and other with thigh as
control), improvements are always observed. One question remains: Are the improvements the
result of the combined action of massage and the active ingredients or solely the result of the
massage?
In the case of more elaborated trials (double-blind and placebo-controlled), the results are
variable. Some clinical studies clearly show significant improvements in the degree of cellulite
found on the treated thigh compared with the placebo thigh. These improvements are
significant and clearly visible (confirmed by the subjects themselves), but not very impressive.
Other clinical trials indicate that similar significant improvements of cellulite were observed
with the inert massage product and the massage product with the active ingredients. These
trials substantiate the hypothesis that the cellulite improvements are due to physiotherapeutic
treatments such as massage, lymph drainage, or thermal occlusion of the skin and not solely to
the so-called active anticellulite dermato-cosmetic ingredients. The majority of cosmetic firms
carry out internally clinical trials to evaluate the efficacy of their products. But the results of
these clinical studies are generally not published in scientific peer-reviewed journals and are
only accessible through the Internet, released press maps, and ordinary publicity in women’s
magazines. This information, although interesting to consult, is not considered by the author as
real scientific publications. Most of the claims presented here are based on anthropometric
measurements and in vitro data.
It must be noted that many anticellulite or slimming claims are based on in vitro studies.
In vitro metabolism studies on adipocytes have shown that different molecules (caffeine, plant
extracts, etc.) can be considered as active ingredients in order to slow down the synthesis of
triglycerides and to stimulate the degradation of triglycerides in the adipocyte. However,
when using these active molecules in vivo as anticellulite ingredients, one must take into
account the limitations in percutaneous penetration of the active molecules through the skin to
reach the hypodermis. For example, caffeine penetrates readily into the skin, but scant
information is published about the penetration of these plant extracts.
Another problem is related to the concentration of the active products in commercial
anticellulite products. It must be assumed that the concentrations of plant extracts are rather
low considering the high cost of these extracts and the potential danger of these plant
derivatives as allergens. Possibility of problems of photoallergy and photoirritation must be
considered.
REFERENCES
1. Rossi AB, Vergnanini AL. Cellulite: a review. J Eur Acad Dermatol 2000; 14:251–262.
2. Avram MM. Cellulite: a review of its physiology and treatment. J Cosmet Laser Ther 2004; 6:181–185.
3. Rona C, Carrera M, Berardesca E. Testing anticellulite products. Int J Cosmet Sci 2006; 28:169–173.
4. Rawlings AV. Cellulite and its treatment. Int J Cosmet Sci 2006; 28:175–190.
5. Terranova F, Berardesca E, Maibach H. Cellulite: nature and aethiopathogenesis 2006; 28:157–167.
6. Merleen JF, Curri SB, Sarteel AM. La cellulite, affection micro-vasculo-conjective. Phlebologie 1979;
32:279–280.
7. Curri SB. Lipo¨dem and Zellulitis. In: Foldi M, Tischendorf F, eds. Ein Symposium, Munich:
Medizischer Verlag Erdmann-Brenger, 1983:9–77.
8. Curri SB. O¨ dem, Lympho¨dem und perivaskula¨ee Grundsunstanz. In: Karl F, ed. Schriftenreihe
Manuel Lymphdrainage nach Dr. Vodder, Band 2. Heidelberg: Haug Verlag, 1988:7–101.
9. Curri SB, Ryan TJ. Panniculopathy and fibrosclerosis of the femal breast and thigh. In: Ryan TJ, Curry
SB, eds. Cutaneous Adipose Tissue. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1989:107–119.
10. Ryan TJ, Curri SB. Blood vessels and lymphatics. Clin Dermatol 1989; 7:25–36.
11. Curri SB, Bombardelli E. Local liposystrophy and districtual microcirculation. Cosm Toil 1994; 109:51–65.
12. Di Salvo RM. Controlling the appearance of cellulite. Cosm Toil 1995; 110:50–59.
13. Rosenbaum M, Pietro V, Hellmer J, et al. An exploratory investigation of the morphology and
biochemistry of cellulite. Plast Reconstr Surg 1998; 101:1934–1939.
610
Barel

=== Page 628 ===
14. Barel AO. Etude objective de la lipodystrophie des tissus graisseux au moyen de me´thodes de
bioenginering non invasives. Journal de Me´decine Esthetique 1998; 25:181–189.
15. Querleux B, Cornillon C, Jolivet O, et al. Anatomy and Physiology of subcutaneous adipose tissue by
in vivo magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy: relationships with sex and presence of
cellulite. Skin Res Technol 2002; 8:118–124.
16. Lucassen G, Van der Sluys W, Van Herk J, et al. The effectiveness of massage treatment on cellulite as
monitored by ultrasound imaging. Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:154–160.
17. Nuijs AM, Van Herk J. Characterizing the texture of cellulite skin. Abstract of the 12th International
Symposium on Bioengineering and the Skin, Boston, 1998.
18. Mirrashed F, Sharp JC, Krause V, et al. Pilot study of dermal and subcutaneous fat structures by MRI
in individuals who differ in gender, BMI and cellulite grading. Skin Res Technol 2004; 10:161–168.
19. Querleux B. Magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy. J Cosmet Dermatol 2004; 3:156–161.
20. Ippolito F, Di Carlo A. La thermographie: son utilite´ comme crite`re de diagnostic et d’efficacite´ dans le
traitement de la cellulite. Journal de Me´decine Esthe´tique et de Chirurgie dermatologique, 1984;
11:81–86.
21. Marzorati V, Curri SB. Contact thermography and cellulitis, technical information. Milan: IPS, 1990.
22. Barel AO, Noe¨l G, Vandermeulen S, et al. The use of contact thermography using liquid crystal in the
objective evaluation of a topical anti-cellulitis treatment. Abstract of the 3rd Congress International
Society for Ultrasound and the Skin, Elsinore, Denmark, 1993.
23. Barel AO. Study of subcutaneous fat tissue (normal and lipodystrophy, cellulite) using noninvasive
bioengineering methods. Abstract of the 12th International Symposium on Bioengineering and the
Skin, Boston, 1998.
24. Serup J. Ten Years experience with high-frequency ultrasound examination of the skin: development
and refinement of technique and equipment. In: Altmeyer P, ed. Ultrasound in Dermatology. Berlin:
Springer Verlag, 1992:41–54.
25. Serup J, Keiding J, Fullerton A, et al. High frequency ultrasound examination of skin: introductionand
guide. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, eds. Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. Boca Raton: CRC Press,
1995:239–256.
26. Fornage B. Ultrasound examination of the skin and subcutaneous tissues at 7.5 to 10 MHz. In: Serup J,
Jemec GBE, eds. Non -invasive methods and the skin. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995:279–288.
27. Pittet JC, Perrier C, Schnebert S, et al. Variability of fatty tissue thighness measurements using
ultrasonography. Abstract of the 5th meeting of the International Society for Skin Imaging, Vienna,
1997.
28. Perin F, Pittet JC, Perrier P, et al. Ultrasound imaging assessment of adipose tissue thickness
variations during the menstrual cycle. Abstract of the 5th meeting of the International Society for Skin
Imaging, Vienna, 1997.
29. Adenola J, Maibach H. Ultrasonography, thermography and the Cutometer in the assessment of
cellulite treatments. Abstract of the 12th International Symposium on Bioengineering and the Skin,
Boston, 1998.
30. Perin F, Pittet JC, Schnebert S, et al. Ultrasonic assessment of variations in thickness of subcutaneous
fat during normal menstrual cycle. Eur J Ultrasound 1999; 11:7–14.
31. Schnebert S, Perin F, Pittet JC, et al. Echographie, une technique accessible et fiable pour mesurer
l’efficacite´ des produits amincissants. Cosme´tologie 1999; 22:35–38.
32. Perin F, Pittet JC, Perrier C, et al. Methodological aspects of the ultrasonic measurement of
subcutaneous adipous tissue thickness for the evaluation of the efficacy of slimming treatments.
JEMU 1999; 20:318–325.
33. Bertin C, Zunino H, Pittet JC, et al. A double-blind evaluation of the activity of an ant-cellulite product
containing retinol, caffeine and ruscogine by a combination of several non-invasive methods.
J Cosmet Sci 2001; 52:199–210.
34. Diridollou S, Lehnisch A, Black D, et al. Exploration of subcutaneous fat tissue using an in vivo
ultrasound technique. Abstract of the International Congress of the ISBS, ISCS and SFIC, Paris, France,
June 27 2002.
35. Pittet JC, Beau P. High resolution sonography and magnetic resonance microscopy. Abstract of the
14th International Congress of the international Society for Bioengineering and the Skin, Hamburg,
Germany, May 21, 2003. Skin Res Technol 2003; 9:218.
36. Gassmu¨ller J, Kecskes A, Jah P. Stylus method for skin surface contour measurement. In: Jemec GBE,
ed. Handbook of non-invasive methods and the skin, Serup J. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995:83–89.
37. Corcuff P, Le´veˆque JL. Skin surface replica image analysis of furrows and wrinkles, In: Jemec GBE, ed.
Handbook of non-invasive methods and the skin, Serup J. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995:89–97.
38. Efsen J, Hansen HN. Christiansen S. Keiding J. Laser profilometry, In: Jemec GBE, ed. Handbook of
non-invasive methods and the skin, Serup J. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995:97–107.
39. Mignot J. Three-dimensional evaluation of skin surface: micro- and macrorelief, In: Jemec GBE, ed.
Handbook of non-invasive methods and the skin, Serup J. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995:97–107.
Anticellulite Products and Treatments
611

=== Page 629 ===
40. Tympanidou P, Tympanidou B. A non contact technique for the objective evaluation of cellulite and
local mobilization. Abstract of the 12th International Symposium on Bioengineering and the Skin,
Boston 1998.
41. Lagarde JM, Vie´ K, Beau P, et al. Evaluation of a slimming product using multi-scale analysis of 3-D
topographical skin imaging with continuous wavelet transformation. Abstract of the 12th Interna-
tional Symposium on Bioengineering and the Skin, Boston, 1998.
42. Nuijs AM, Van Herk JJ, Barel AO. The effect of massage treatment on cellulite. Abstract of the
International Conference on Health & Beauty for women in the Arab world. London, U.K., Oct 30,
2002.
43. Perrier C, Pittet JV, Schnebert S, et al. Photographic assessment of so-called cellulite. Abstract of the
5th Congress of the International Society for Skin Imaging, Vienna, Austria, 1997.
44. Perin F, Perrier C, Pittet JC, et al. Assessment of skin improvement treatment efficacy using
photograding of mechanically-accentuated macrorelief of thigh skin. Int J Cosmet Sci 2000; 22:147–156.
45. Collis N, Elliot LA, Sharpe C, et al. Cellulite treatment: a myth or reality: a prospective randomized
controlled trial of two therapies, endermologie and aminophylline cream, Plast Reconstr Surg 1999;
104:1110–1114.
46. Alster TS, Tanzi EL. Cellulite treatment using a novel combination radiofrequency, infrared light and
mechanical tissue manipulation device. J Cosmet Laser Ther 2005; 7:81–85.
47. Kulick K. Evaluation of the combination of radio frequency, infrared energy and mechanical rollers
with suction to improve skin surface irregularities (cellulite) in a limited treatment area J Cosmet
Laser Ther 2006; 8:185–190.
48. Rao J, Gold MH, Goldman MP. A two-center, double-blinded, randomized trial testing the tolerability
and efficacy of a novel therapeutic agent for cellulite reduction. J Cosmet Dermatol 2005; 4:93–102.
49. Kligman AM, Pagnoni A, Stoudemayer T. Topical retinol improves cellulite. J Dermatol Treat 1999,
10, 119–125.
50. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Pie´rard GE, Henry F, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of topical
retinol in the treatment of cellulite. Am J Clin Dermatol 2000; 1:369–374.
51. Sainio EL, Rantanen T, Kanerva L. Ingredients and safety of cellulite creams. Eur J Dermatol 2000;
10:596–603.
612
Barel

=== Page 630 ===
60
Baby Care Products
Marie Lemper, Kristien De Paepe, and Vera Rogiers
Department of Toxicology, Dermato-Cosmetology and Pharmacognosy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Brussels, Belgium
Ralf Adam
Procter & Gamble Service GmbH, Schwalbach am Taunus, Germany
INTRODUCTION
A great variety of baby skin and hair care products are brought to the market. Those products
claim to be specially developed for the delicate baby skin, and therefore specific requirements
should be considered when developing products for the care of babies. In order to understand
whether babies need different skin and hair care cosmetics than adults, it seems necessary to
explain some anatomical and physiological differences of the skin and annexes between both
groups. A further distinction can be made between the skin of full-term and premature babies,
but in this chapter only the former group is considered. Cleansing and protective cosmetics are
available for babies and their safety is in the EU based on exposure-based risk assessment for
the individual ingredients as well as for the finished product. Finally, some common baby
skin problems and the applicability of cosmetic products under impaired skin conditions are
discussed.
ANATOMICAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BABY
AND ADULT SKIN AND SKIN ANNEXES
A complete overview of the morphological characteristics of baby skin is present in several
comprehensive handbooks (1–4). Here some key differences in comparison to adult skin and
annexes are given.
In general, a full-term baby possesses all skin structures of adult skin, and anatomically
these structures do not undergo dramatic changes after birth. The skin of the newborn could be
considered as an “unripe” skin, which progressively adapts during the first weeks and months
of life. These adaptations lay at the origin of the physiological differences observed between
baby and adult skin.
l The epidermis of term infants is well developed and does not show much difference
with that of adults (5). Only in prematures, the stratum corneum is lacking a
significant barrier function (1). In the stratum germinativum, besides a majority of
cylindric keratinocytes, dendritic cells including melanocytes, cells of Langerhans, and
Merkel cells are present in a normal number. However, their functionality—namely
photoprotection, immunological barrier, and receptor function, respectively—still has
to develop progressively. The melanocytes are less pigmented, which explains the pale
color of the newborn’s skin and which makes sunburn an important risk factor (3).
l At the basal membrane of newborn skin, cohesion structures are present in a normal
number in comparison with adult skin (1,5).
l In the dermis, numerous fibroblasts produce elastic and collagen fibers but fewer in
number than in adult life. Most of the development and maturation of the elastic fibers
occur after birth, and it is only at the age of three years that the elastic fibers become
completely mature. It is known that the dermal matrix differs in composition
depending on age. Indeed, during development, the water, glycogen, and hyaluronic
acid contents of the matrix decrease, but its dermatan sulfate content increases. This
difference in composition probably interferes with the particular turgescence of the
newborn’s skin (6).

=== Page 631 ===
In the embryonic dermal skin, primitive dermal vessels can be seen that differentiate into
arterioles, venules, and capillaries. With respect to the vascular system, the subpapillar plexus
is not yet completely developed, and the upper layer of the dermis contains a rich
but disorganized capillary network, causing the erythematous aspect of the newborn. The
cutaneous nerve system is also not yet finalized and may lie at the basis of masked intolerances
(3,6).
l The immature hypodermis of baby skin consists of small lobules of roundly shaped
adipoblasts that are richly vascularized. The fatty acid composition of the triglycerides
is more saturated, which results in a higher fusion point of the lipids than measured
for adult skin (1,5).
l The hairs of a newborn are well developed. Sometimes some lanugo hairs are still
observed. After birth, the hairs pass from the anagenic into the telogenic phase. As a
consequence, baby’s hairs fall out after about eight weeks. Afterward, the hair cycle
becomes similar to the one observed for adults, and hairs will be present in different
phases. The hairs, however, are very thin and only faintly pigmented, but these
phenomena normalize as a function of time (7).
l Sebaceous glands, when stimulated by the androgens originating from the mother, are
well developed. Their secretions constitute the largest part of the vernix caseosa. That
is why at birth, the skin is covered with a white fatty substance. The vernix caseosa is a
naturally occurring fetal barrier film produced in late pregnancy (8). Besides the
secretion of sebaceous and epidermal lipids, desquamation of maturing fetal
corneocytes also takes part in the development of the fetal barrier. The vernix is
thought to have multiple overlapping biological functions like moisturization, anti-
infective, antioxidant, wound healing, and waterproofing (9,10). Because it lacks
desmosomal interconnections between corneocytes, it is also referred to as the “mobile
phase” stratum corneum. Removal of vernix lipids can modify the water sorption-
desorption profile (11,12).
The vernix caseosa is taken away during the first washing of the baby. After loss
of this protective layer and the onset of a desquamative stratum corneum, the skin is
exposed to a much dryer environment than the one present during fetal development
(13). Erythema occurs that changes in appearance and gets a more marbered aspect
that progressively disappears. This is an adaptation of the microvascular system (6).
Because of the different biological effects of the vernix caseosa, the question is
often raised whether it would not be better to leave this natural film on the baby
instead of washing it away. Several publications investigating the effect of immediate
bathing of newborns, however, are contradictory (14–17). Vernix distribution is
dependent on gestational age, delivery mode, gender, race, and meconium exposure
and positively affects skin hydration, skin pH, and erythema. These multiple effects
would support its retention on the skin surface after birth (8). Vernix films also retain
endogenous chymotrypsin, thus preventing loss of this epidermal enzyme and
protecting the epidermal barrier from noxious substances (18). In this respect, the
World Health Organization (WHO) developed general guidelines recommending that
neonatal bathing should not be undertaken within the first six hours of birth (19).
In certain cases, large sebaceous glands are observed together with the
occurrence of the typical symptoms of so-called acne neonatorum. This particularly
happens in male newborns and can persist for a few months. It is seen as a temporary
effect of the androgens that are present in the mother’s blood. Reactivation of the
sebaceous glands only occurs later on, around puberty (17).
l The hydrolipidic layer, mainly composed of sebum from the sebaceous glands and water
originating from eccrine glands and the transepidermal water loss (TEWL), is not fully
developed in babies. This protective water-in-oil (w/o) mixture is sometimes even
nearly absent, which also has an effect on the skin pH of the newborn (20).
Consequently, the observed skin pH imbalance might be responsible for a lower
capability to neutralize the alkalinization, especially seen in the diaper area due to
urine and defecation.
614
Lemper et al.

=== Page 632 ===
l The eccrine sweat glands are normally formed but their intervention is still immature,
affecting thermoregulation. Apocrine glands only become functional around puberty
(6,21).
PHYSIOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BABY AND ADULT SKIN
On the basis of TEWL and dermal absorption studies, term infants seem to possess a fully
developed stratum corneum with adult barrier properties. Other parameters, such as skin
thickness, skin pH, and stratum corneum hydration, show that neonatal skin is adjusting very
well to the extra uterine environment. This is rather in contrast to a more steady state situation
of adult skin (22).
Dermal Absorption
Dermal absorption in newborn skin is similar to that observed in adult skin. For babies,
however, a number of typical risk factors exist (23–25).
1.
The surface area/body weight ratio is 2.3-fold higher in newborns than in adults
decreasing to 1.8-fold and 1.6-fold at 6 and 12 months, respectively (26). Application
of the same amount of product on a similar body surface of baby versus adult could
result in higher blood and tissue concentrations in the newborn. This ratio is taken up
in the intraspecies factor of 10, used in exposure-based risk assessment.
2.
Pharmacokinetic parameters differ widely between babies and adults and result in
reduced clearance and/or a longer half-life of bioavailable substances, thus
increasing the potential risk for adverse reactions in babies (Table 1). Premature
and full-term neonates tend to show a three- to nine-times longer half-life than
adults. However, once the neonatal period is over, often a greater elimination and
higher clearance are observed compared with adults bringing back the normal
equilibrium (26,27). As referred by Renwick et al. (28), this neonatal period would
coincide with the period of lactation (26–30).
3.
In-use conditions of topical products also play a role. Cosmetic skin care products often
are applied onto large body surfaces, e.g., cleansing lotions, sunscreens, etc.,
increasing not only the risk for local effects but also dermal absorption and potential
systemic toxicity. This factor is considered in exposure-based risk assessment.
4.
The diaper area and nondiapered regions are indistinguishable at birth but show
differential behavior over the first 14 days, with the diapered region having a
higher pH and increased hydration (31). Special circumstances arise because of the
close confining clothes and diapers and the uncontrolled urination and defecation.
The close-fitting diaper provides a warm nutritive environment for the proliferation
of bacteria (32). Because of the interaction between the urine and the feces, urease
becomes activated and converts urea into ammonia, giving rise to alkaline skin pH
Table 1
Potential Differences in Pharmacokinetic Parameters Between Newborns and Adults
Parameters
Newborn
Adult
Plasma binding
þ
þþ
Plasma protein concentration
þ
þþ
Body water
þþ
þ
Fat distribution
þ
þþ
Brain development
þ
þþ
Brain-blood barrier
þ
þþ
Brain volume
þþ
þ
Cyt P450 biotransformation
þ
þþ
Conjugation reactions
þ
þþ
Relative liver mass
þþ
þ
Glomerular filtration
þ
þþ
Tubular secretion
þ
þþ
Source: Modified from Refs. 26–30.
Baby Care Products
615

=== Page 633 ===
levels. As a consequence, fecal enzymes such as lipases and proteases become
activated and damage the fragile skin in the diaper area. Despite modern diaper
technology, irritant diaper dermatitis can not completely be avoided, favoring
dermal absorption of xenobiotics. A number of molecules, which historically have
been used in the diaper area, are known to induce systemic toxicity and must be
used very carefully and only when indicated, e.g., hexachlorophene, dichloro-
phene, corticosteroids, boric acid, and ethanol (24). In risk assessment of cosmetics,
the margin of safety (MoS) approach is used when defining acceptable human
exposure levels. When extrapolating from experimental studies to human, the
magnitude of the uncertainty factor must take into account a variety of
considerations, such as species differences, sensitive subpopulations, duration and
route of exposure, and vehicle or matrix effects. In addition, when the diaper area is
irritated, 100% dermal absorption should be used (19,33). Innovative hygiene
absorbent and baby care products, however, provide an increasingly good skin
compatibility profile, making the frequency and severity of diaper dermatitis
declining (34,35).
Transepidermal Water Loss
The barrier function of the skin not only prevents absorption of toxic substances, but also
controls TEWL. In particular when skin is damaged, excessive TEWL occurs (36–38). In a
healthy, fully developed newborn, TEWL values of 6 to 8 g/m2h water are being measured,
depending on the measuring technology (39). TEWL increases proportionally with immaturity,
which means that premature children have an increased evaporative heat loss and
subsequently a poor temperature control (38,40). Although skin maturation occurs rapidly,
fluid and electrolyte shift as well as body temperature have to be controlled frequently (41).
Also increased risk of local and systemic toxicity from topically applied substances rises
with increasing TEWL or barrier damage (42). In the diaper area TEWL is often defined as
skin surface water loss (SSWL) and is used to measure the capability of a diaper to keep the
skin dry (43,44).
Defense Against Infection: Skin Thickness, Skin pH, Stratum Corneum Hydration
The water content of the stratum corneum influences the barrier function, dermal absorption,
reactivity to irritants, and the skin’s mechanical properties. Although healthy infants and
adults tend to have similar TEWL values, newborns (until 8–24 months) still present somewhat
higher water contents in the horny layer and a greater variation than adults up to one year
(38,39,45).
In newborns, skin tends to have a higher pH at birth than a few days later. Among other
factors, this higher pH might reflect the influence of the vernix caseosa and the amniotic fluid
(both pH values above 7) during the first days of life (38). The pH stabilizes at a slightly acidic
range (pH ¼ 5–6), although values of less than 5 also have been reported (31,38,46). Acidic skin
protects against pathogenic microorganisms to which the baby is exposed after birth and
serves in the defense against infections. Indeed, microbial colonization of the skin starts
immediately after birth by so-called saprophytes that are not pathogenic and are credited
with protective properties against some harmful microorganisms (5). They require an acidic
surrounding for optimal living conditions (39). Whereas the pH value of baby skin is, after a
few days, comparable to the pH value of adult skin, the buffering capacity of baby skin is much
lower. Therefore, baby skin is more susceptible to pH changes induced by metabolic pathways
such as the enzymatic generation of free fatty acids from phospholipids or urocanic acid
from histidine, the desquamation process of the stratum corneum with formation of filaggrin
and keratohyalin breakdown products, and the formation of pyrrolidone carboxylic acid and
Nþ/Hþ antiporter (31,47).
BABY CARE PRODUCTS FOR SKIN AND HAIR
From the anatomical and physiological differences between baby skin and adult skin, it
appears that frequent contact with xenobiotics, which could damage or disrupt the barrier
function of the stratum corneum and change the skin pH, may be at the basis of an increased
616
Lemper et al.

=== Page 634 ===
dermal absorption, an increased TEWL and the onset of infections (5,39,42). Therefore,
exposure-based risk assessment for baby products is key to bringing safe baby cosmetics to the
market.
During the development of baby products a number of criteria are taken into consideration:
-High quality of raw materials in terms of purity, stability, and microbiology via
appropriate certificates of analysis.
-Skin irritation, which is dose dependent, can be controlled by avoiding well-known
irritative ingredients and/or reducing concentration or frequency of application.
-Skin sensitization, triggered by an immunological response, is not restricted to the area
of application. Therefore, exposure-based risk assessment is needed to exclude an
induction of sensitization in particular for perfume ingredients, even when IFRA-
tested or excluding the 26 allergens identified in the 7th Amendment of the EU
cosmetic legislation (48).
-As is the rule for adult cosmetics, safety data of baby cosmetics are taken up in a
technical information file (TIF) and the risk assessment—approved by a safety
assessor —is the driving force behind the safety of baby cosmetics. Usually, special
attention is given to the concentration of (i) reactive colorants; (ii) promotional
additives, “natural” and “exotic” ingredients, in particular not well-identified
mixtures, plant extracts, and ingredients of animal origin or a questionable, impure
source; (iii) potential allergens, penetration enhancers, organic solvents (ethanol,
isopropanol, highly reactive substances, highly detersive or foaming agents, and
antiseptics in particular in daily use products); and (iv) concentrations of
preservatives.
-It is considered to be good practice (i) to add antioxidants to protect unsaturated lipids
from oxidative reactions; (ii) to adjust the pH of the final product resulting in a
skin friendly pH value between 4.5 and 6 after product application; (iii) to add
chelating or sequestering agents, when appropriate, to prevent heavy metal
precipitation and protect the preservative system; and (iv) to use skin barrier
protective ingredients.
Baby cosmetics can be subdivided in two groups, namely cleansing and protecting
cosmetics.
Cleansing Cosmetics
Bath Products
Bathing a baby for five to seven minutes in lukewarm water (35–368C) usually is sufficient
(39,49). Daily bathing is general practice, but not optimal because of the risk of drying out and
irritating baby’s skin, in particular when aggressive anionics with high degreasing properties
are involved (50). Better is to use so-called secondary tensides, including nonionics and
amphoterics, or mild anionics such as sulfosuccinates, isothionates, and protein fatty acids
condensates. The use of bath oil is preferred over bath foam and bath cream additives
particularly when dry, sensitive skin or atopic eczema is present. For optimal effect, the baby
is bathed for 5 minutes in plain water, then the bath oil is added and bathing continues for
another 5 to 10 minutes (49). Also adding starch to the bath water or using starch-containing
bath additives may help to restore an impaired skin barrier (51). In general, the use of bath
foam is not suitable for babies because of its high content of primary tensides producing the
excessive foam.
Shampoo
Baby shampoo usually has a pH of 6 to 7 and ideally should contain only mild tensides,
e.g., mixtures of nonionics and amphoteric substances (7). The shampoo should not be
irritating to the eyes. To avoid eye contact the viscosity of the shampoo could be increased.
Parents often think that foam is important for the cleansing properties but foam has no
cleansing function, and the ingredients required to produce a sufficient amount of stable foam
are often quite irritating and not suitable to be used alone in baby shampoos, e.g., alkyl sulfates
and alkyl ether sulfates (39,49). Furthermore, it is not necessary to wash baby’s hairs every day
Baby Care Products
617

=== Page 635 ===
since they are neither dirty nor greasy. As the hydrolipidic layer is not yet formed on baby’s
skin, and sebum production is low, the amount of lipids distributed on the hairs is limited and
is easily washed away.
Soap Bars and Syndets
Soaps (salts of fatty acids) liberate, in contact with water, alkali and increase the pH up to
values of 10. Also precipitation occurs with calcium and magnesium ions from hard water. On
the contrary, syndets (synthetic detergents) do not precipitate with hard water and have an
adjustable pH to neutral or slightly acidic. As syndets cover the whole range of synthetic
tensides—with exception of the legally protected soap formulations—they can be aggressive
(e.g., alkyl sulfates) or mild (isothionates), depending on the choices and mixtures made. Like
soaps, they can dry out the skin when not containing lubricant additives. In addition, when
soap and washcloth are used in the diaper area, the buffering capacity of the skin is further
damaged (35,49). Extensive washing with aggressive tensides disturbs the flora of the newborn
skin and can lead to infections (15). In addition, perfumed cleansing products may cause
contact allergic reactions due to enhanced skin penetration of the perfume by the presence of
anionic soap ingredients (50).
Cleansing Milk
For cleansing of the baby and in particular the diaper zone, liquid cleansers based on oil-in-
water (o/w) emulsions are often used, especially when water and washcloth are not well
tolerated by the baby skin. Also soft tissues or towelets impregnated with these emulsions are
present on the market. They are easy to use and contain anionic and/or nonionic tensides (49).
When a baby is prone to contact dermatitis, it is advised to screen the ingredients list because
those tissues often contain high concentrations of preservatives, necessary to prevent
microbiological contamination of the tissues (52). Mineral-oil impregnated tissues can increase
the presence of Candida in the diaper area and change the composition of the skin surface
lipids.
Baby Wipes
Over the last decade disposable baby wipes have been developed as an alternative to
traditional cleansing methods. They usually consist of a nonwoven carrier material soaked
with an emulsion-type, watery, or oily lotion. Mineral oil wipes do not efficiently clean
hydrophilic components and potentially slip over fecal contaminations. Most emulsion-type
lotions are oil-in-water (o/w) and enriched with emollients and surfactants. Because of their
high water content, the preservative system is very important to ensure that the product will
not be contaminated during its normal lifetime. Products for sensitive skin have also been
developed, which offer choice regarding the nonuse of fragrances or additives with which
problems have previously occurred. Clinical studies confirmed that high-quality baby wipes
are suitable for daily cleansing of the diaper area, of healthy babies as well as of babies with
atopic dermatitis (35,53).
Protecting Cosmetics
Face/Body Creams and Body Lotions
Protective creams for the napkin zone are preventive or protect the skin against aggressions
from urine, feces, and their interactions. Oil-in-water (o/w) creams do exist, but in case of
starting skin damage mostly water-in-oil (w/o) creams or water-free ointments with talc,
kaolin, and zinc oxide are advised. Allantoin, bisabolol, aloe vera extract, and silicones are
often added to improve water resistance. In winter, barrier creams protect baby’s face against
freezing cold and wind. The lipid phase often contains petrolatum. These products are
particularly effective around the nose and mouth. They usually also contain moisturizers,
soothing active ingredients, and nonionic emulsifiers (39).
Powder
Talc powders are not often applied anymore in the napkin area. They absorb moisture,
decrease maceration, and prevent irritation of the fragile baby skin (49). Powders,
618
Lemper et al.

=== Page 636 ===
however, pose a potential inhalation risk and can form on the skin little granules that induce
friction. Furthermore, talc is susceptible to contamination with microorganisms and needs
sterilization (32,54).
Sunscreens
During the past years, a steady increase of all types of skin cancer has been observed. It is,
therefore, very important to inform parents and children about good sun protection. Sun
exposure in childhood is seen as a risk factor for skin cancer later in life, as it is known that
there is a relationship between skin burning in the prepubertal period and the occurrence of
malignant melanoma 10 to 20 years later (55). Therefore, babies and infants should, in first
instance, be kept out of the sun and protected by appropriate clothing and hats. Almost 90% of
the clothes provide an equivalent protection to sunscreens of SPF 30 or higher, although the
protection offered is dependent on weave, color, weight, stretch, and wetness (56,57). Even
special protective clothes for children exist today. They have undergone special treatment to
filter out UV light (58,59).
It has been reported that sunscreens often are ineffective in preventing sunburns
completely, because parents tend to forget to reapply or limit the use to just the upper part of
the body. The importance of using multiple sun protection methods to maximize effective sun
protection clearly has to be promoted (60). Extreme care should be taken especially during the
first weeks and months of life since pigmentation and thermoregulation are not yet fully
developed (3). When sunscreens are used, preferably products containing UVA and UVB
screens and scattering powders or a sunscreen mix with a high sun protection factor (SPF)
should be applied and preferably several times a day (61).
Studies have shown that the application thickness of sunscreen products in adults usually
lies between 0.5 and 1.5 mg/cm2, although the SPF of a product is assessed in vivo at an
internationally agreed application thickness of 2 mg/cm2 (62). Application thickness has a
significant effect on the expected protection of the sunscreen. A uniform layer needs to be
applied, with special attention to areas like ears, neck, and feet as experience learns that these are
commonly skipped (60,63).
The type of UV filter(s) used is important. In the EU, only UV filters taken up in
Annex VII of the Cosmetics Directive 76/768/EEC are allowed. For babies and children
often micronized and nano forms of ZnO and TiO2 are used as an alternative to chemical
sunscreens (64,65). The popularity of these products results from the fact that they are
effective and thought to be safe. As nanotechnology in general is questioned with respect to
human health, nanoparticles of ZnO and TiO2 will also be reexamined for their safe use as
UV filters (66).
Recently, the European Commission expressed its concern with regard to the efficacy of
sunscreen products and the claims made thereto. Aiming at ensuring sufficient protection
against UV light and providing proper information to the general public, Commission
Recommendation 2006/647/EC unambiguously states minimum efficacy criteria for sun
products: the UVB SPF must at least amount to 6 and the UVA protection factor may not be
inferior to one-third of the SPF. In addition, the Commission restricts the UVB SPF values to
8 possibilities, namely 6, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 50, and 50þ. Higher SPFs are not allowed and
mentions such as “100% protection,” “sunblock,” or “all day prevention” are considered
misleading and therefore forbidden (67).
The viscosity of sunscreens is important since the products must remain on the skin, even
with bathing and sweating. Today most commercially available sunscreens have some water
resistance or carry the label of being water resistant, very water resistant, or waterproof,
determined in Europe according to Colipa guidelines (68).
Some of the organic UVB filters, like 4-methyl-benzylidene camphor, benzophenone-3,
homosalate, octylmethoxy-cinnamate, and octyldimethyl-PABA, have been accused of being
endocrine disrupters. The safety profiles of these UV screens were revised by the European
Scientific Committee on Consumer Products (69) and considered to be safe for human use. In
the meantime, several articles appeared, pointing to potential endocrine disrupting properties
of sunscreens (70–76). The issue is not limited to sunscreens alone and appropriate in vivo tests
are now being included in the risk assessment process. Efforts are also done to develop in vitro
alternatives (77).
Baby Care Products
619

=== Page 637 ===
APPROPRIATE CARE OF FREQUENT SKIN PROBLEMS
Diaper Rash
Diaper rash is a common condition that refers to irritation on the groin, thighs, buttocks, and
perianal area of the newborn. It is caused by the combination of incontinence and diaper use
(31). Excessive wetness makes the skin more fragile, and diapers may induce an occlusive
effect that makes baby skin more vulnerable. Consequently, hydrated skin is more prone to
mechanical damage and chafing of the skin since an increased coefficient of friction is
observed, and it may allow irritants to penetrate the stratum corneum more easily. As
explained before, not only occlusion but also a higher pH can be an underlying factor, which
induces several enzymes-mediated irritations. Alkalinization of the skin increases skin
penetration of microorganism and activates fecal enzymes (34,78).
The most appropriate strategy for diaper rash is prophylaxis, and this includes keeping
the skin dry. The selection of suitable diapers and frequent diaper changes are important
because friction between skin and diaper is often an additional factor. Keeping the baby in an
appropriately warmed room with naked buttocks for some limited time period is also quite
effective.
In good skin care of the diaper zone, the application of emollients plays an important
role, and the application of a thick layer creates an effective protective barrier. ZnO is an often-
used component in diaper rash protection products. It adheres well to the injured skin, has
adstringent and some mild anti-inflammatory properties, and prevents skin injury or further
damage. If the diaper rash shows evidence of Candida infection—often seen as satellite lesions
extending the rash—antifungal therapy can be indicated (5,39,78,79).
Acne Neonatorum
Mild acne may occur in newborn infants. It consists of closed comedones on the nose,
forehead, and cheeks. Pustules, open comedones, and inflammatory pustules may also occur
but are less frequent. The cause of neonatal acne is not clearly defined but it is believed to be
secondary to the stimulation of the neonatal sebaceous glands by maternal androgens. In
boys it is often more pronounced as they have some additional production of testosterone.
Neonatal acne requires no treatment as the lesions spontaneously resolve within one to three
months (80).
Miliaria
Miliaria is a dermatose frequently observed in neonates. It is a generic term denoting retention
of eccrine sweat. Miliaria can be subdivided into three groups: miliaria crystalline, miliaria rubra,
and miliaria profunda. The difference between these three types is the level of the skin where the
obstruction of the sweat gland occurs. Miliaria crystalline refers to an obstruction in the stratum
corneum, rubra an obstruction within the stratum Malpighi, and profunda below the
dermoepidermal junction. There is no specific treatment of miliaria. Measures that can be
taken consist of regulating the heat and humidity of the environment to reduce sweating.
Eventually, the poral obstructions are relieved, but this can take up two or three weeks (81).
CONCLUSION
Full-term newborns have an “unripe” skin, which progressively develops toward adult skin.
Anatomically spoken, the differences are limited but some minor changes occurring at birth
are responsible for the physiological differences observed between baby and adult skin. The
skin of newborns exhibits the same dermal absorption as adult skin, but the circumstances in
newborns are very different, thus increasing the risk for dermal absorption, in particular in the
napkin area. Also the thermoregulation (TEWL and sweating) of the baby is not yet fully
developed, and the skin is easily invaded by infections, the latter often due to subtle pH
changes and the immaturity of the defense systems of the skin. This implies that only safe
cosmetics with safe ingredients should be used for newborns guaranteed by exposure-based
risk assessment. During the development of new baby care products, known potentially eye or
skin irritative or sensitizing ingredients are usually limited to a minimum, and profound
exposure-based risk assessment has become common practice. One usually aims at simple,
620
Lemper et al.

=== Page 638 ===
pure, mild, and pathogens-free formulations. Systemic side effects are not to be expected with
mild rinse-off products (shampoos, bath additives, toilet bars) but should be carefully looked
for when leave-on products for babies are being developed (body milks, hydrating creams,
ointments, powders, sunscreens).
REFERENCES
1. Hardman MJ, Byrne C. Skin structural development. In: Hoath SB, Maibach HI, eds. Neonatal Skin:
Structure and Function. 2nd ed. New York: Informa Health Care, 2003:1–20.
2. Holbrook KA. A histological comparison of infant and adult skin. In: Maibach HI, Boisits EK, eds.
Neonatal Skin. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc., 1982:3–31.
3. Holbrook KA, Sybert VP. Basic science. In: Schachner LA, Hansson RC, eds. Pediatric Dermatology.
2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone Inc., 1995:1–70.
4. Holbrook KA. Structure and function of the developing skin. In: Goldsmith LA, ed. Physiology,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of the Skin. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991:
63–110.
5. Lund CH. Newborn skin care. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, eds. Cosmetic Dermatology. London: Martin
Dunitz, 1994:349–357.
6. Rutter N. The dermis. Semin Neonatol 2000; 5:297–302.
7. Tru¨eb RM. Shampoos: composition and clinical applications [German]. Hautarzt 1998; 49:895–901.
8. Visscher MO, Narendran V, Pickens WL, et al. Vernix caseosa in neonatal adaptation. J Perinatol 2005;
25:440–446.
9. Haubrich KA. Role of vernix caseosa in the neonate: potential application in the adult population.
AACN Clin Issues 2003; 14:457–464.
10. Hoeger PH, Schreiner V, Klaassen IA, et al. Epidermal barrier lipids in human vernix caseosa:
corresponding ceramide pattern in vernix and fetal skin. Br J Dermatol 2002; 146:194–201.
11. Rissmann R, Groenink HWW, Weerheim AM, et al. New insights into ultrastructure, lipid
composition and organization of vernix caseosa. J Invest Dermatol 2006; 126:1823–1833.
12. Tansirikongkol A, Hoath S, Pickens WL, et al. Equilibrium water content in native vernix and its
cellular component. J Pharm Sci 2008; 97:972–981.
13. Walker L, Downe S, Gomez L. Skin care in the well term newborn: two systematic reviews. Birth 2005;
32:224–228.
14. Franck LS, Quinn D, Zahr L. Effect of less frequent bathing of preterm infants on skin flora and
pathogen colonization. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 2000; 29:584–589.
15. Gelmetti C. Skin cleansing in children. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2001; 15(suppl 1):12–15.
16. Nako Y, Harigaya A, Tomomasa T, et al. Effects of bathing immediately after birth on early neonatal
adaptation and morbidity: a prospective randomized comparative study. Pediatr Int 2000; 42:517–522.
17. Quinn D, Newton N, Piecuch R. Effect of less frequent bathing on premature infant skin. J Obstet
Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 2005; 34:741–746.
18. Tansirikongkol A, Wickett RR, Visscher MO, et al. Effect of vernix caseosa on the penetration of
chymotryptic enzyme: potential role in epidermal barrier development. Pediatr Res 2007; 62:49–53.
19. World Health Organization. Pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum and newborn care: a guide for
essential practice. Available at: http://www.who.int/reproductive-health/publications/pcpnc/
index.html. Accessed December 2007.
20. Rogiers V, Derde MP, Verleye G, et al. Standardized conditions needed for skin surface hydration
measurements. Cosmet Toilet 1990; 105:73–82.
21. Moisson YF, Wallach D. Pustular dermatoses in the neonatal period [French]. Ann Pediatr 1992;
39:397–406.
22. Chiou YB, Blume-Peytavi U. Stratum corneum maturation. A review of neonatal skin function. Skin
Pharmacol Physiol 2004; 17:57–66.
23. Kravchenko I, Maibach HI. Percutaneous penetration. In: Hoath SB, Maibach HI, eds. Neonatal Skin—
Structure and Function. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, 2003:285–298.
24. West DP, Worobec S, Solomon LM. Pharmacology and toxicology of infant skin. J Invest Dermatol
1981; 76:147–150.
25. Wester RD, Maibach HI. Understanding percutaneous absorption for occupational health and safety.
Int J Occup Environ Health 2000; 6:86–92.
26. Renwick AG. Toxicokinetics in infants and children in relation to the ADI and TDI. Food Addit
Contam 1998; 15:17–35.
27. Ginsberg G, Hattis D, Sonawane B, et al. Evaluation of child/adult pharmacokinetic differences from
a database derived from the therapeutic drug literature. Toxicol Sci 2002;66:185–200.
28. Renwick AG, Dorne JL, Walton K. An analysis of the need for an additional uncertainty factor for
infants and children. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 2000; 31:286–296.
Baby Care Products
621

=== Page 639 ===
29. Dorne JL. Impact of inter-individual differences in drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics on safety
evaluation. Fundam Clin Pharmacol 2004; 18:609–620.
30. Dorne JL, Walton K, Renwick AG. Human variability in xenobiotic metabolism and pathway-related
uncertainty factors for chemical risk assessment: a review. Food Chem Toxicol 2005; 43:206–216.
31. Visscher MO, Chatterjee R, Munson KA, et al. Changes in diapered and nondiapered infant skin over
the first month of life. Pediatr Dermatol 2000; 17:45–51.
32. Wilkinson JB, Moore RJ. Skin products for babies. In: Wilkinson JB, Moore RJ, eds. Harry’s
Cosmetology. 7th ed. New York: Chemical Publishing, 1982:111–118.
33. SCCP/1005/06: The SCCP’s Notes of Guidance for the Testing of Cosmetic Ingredients and Their
Safety Evaluation. Adopted by the SCCP during the 10th plenary meeting of 19 December 2006.
34. Atherton DJ. A review of the pathophysiology, prevention and treatment of irritant diaper dermatitis.
Curr Med Res Opin 2004; 20:645–649.
35. Ehretsmann C, Schaefer P, Adam R. Cutaneous tolerance of baby wipes by infants with atopic
dermatitis, and comparison of the mildness of baby wipe and water in infant skin. J Eur Acad
Dermatol Venereol 2001; 15(suppl 1):16–21.
36. Rogiers V, EEMCO Group. EEMCO-guidance for the assessment of transepidermal water loss
(TEWL) in cosmetic sciences. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2001; 14:117–129.
37. Schaefer H, Redelmeier TE. Relationship between the structure of compounds and their diffusion
across membranes. In: Schaefer H, Redelmeier TE, eds. Skin Barrier: Principles of Percutaneous
Absorption. Basel: Karger AG, 1996:87–116.
38. Giusti F, Martella A, Bertoni L, et al. Skin barrier, hydration, and pH of the skin of infants under
2 years of age. Pediatr Dermatol 2001; 18:93–96.
39. Scho¨nrock U. Baby care. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach H, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and
Technology. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc., 2001:715–722.
40. Kalia YN, Nonato LB, Lund CH, et al. Development of skin barrier function in premature infants.
J Invest Dermatol 1998; 111:320–326.
41. Shwayder T, Akland T. Neonatal skin barrier: structure, function and disorders. Dermatol Ther 2005;
18:87–103.
42. Marcoux D, Harper J. Cosmetic dermatology in children. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, eds. Cosmetic
Dermatology. London: Martin Dunitz, 1994:359–367.
43. Grove GL, Lemmen JT, Garafalo M, et al. Assessment of skin hydration caused by diapers and
incontinence articles. Curr Probl Dermatol 1998; 26:183–195.
44. Visscher MO, Chatterjee R, Ebel JP, et al. Biomedical assessment and instrumental evaluation of
healthy infant skin. Pediatr Dermatol 2002; 19:473–481.
45. Nikolovski J, Stamatas GN, Kollias N, et al. Barrier function and water-holding and transport
properties of infant stratum corneum are different from adult and continue to develop through the
first year of life. J Invest Dermatol 2008; 128(7):1728–1736.
46. Yosipovitch G, Maayan-Metzger A, Merlob P, et al. Skin barrier properties in different body areas in
neonates. Pediatrics 2000; 106:105–108.
47. Hoeger PH, Enzmann CC. Skin physiology of the neonate and young infant: a prospective study of
functional skin parameters during early infancy. Pediatr Dermatol 2002; 19:256–262.
48. EU, 2003. Directive 2003/15/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 February 2003
amending Council Directive 76/768/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
relating to cosmetic products. OJ L066, 26–35, 11 March 2003.
49. Dhar S. Newborn skin care revisited. Indian J Dermatol 2007; 52:1–4.
50. de Groot AC, Weyland JW, Nater JP. Cosmetics for the body and parts of the body. In: de Groot AC,
Weyland JW, Nater JP, eds. Unwanted Effects of Cosmetics and Drugs Used in Dermatology. 3rd ed.,
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1994:530–556.
51. De Paepe K, Hachem JP, Vanpee E, et al. Effect of rice starch as a bath additive on the barrier function
of healthy, but SLS-damaged skin and skin of atopic patients. Acta Derm Venereol 2002; 82:184–186.
52. Fields KS, Neslon T, Powell D. Contact dermatitis caused by baby wipes. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006;
54:S230–S232.
53. Odio M, Streicher-Scott J, Hansen RC. Disposable baby wipes: efficacy and skin mildness. Dermatol
Nurs 2001; 13:107–112, 117–118, 121.
54. Mofenson HC, Greensher J, DiTomasso A, et al. Baby powder—a hazard. Pediatrics 1981; 68:265–266.
55. Vergnes C, Daures JP, Sancho-Garnier H, et al. Patterns of sun exposure and sun protection of
children in the south of France. Ann Dermatol Venereol 1999; 126:505–512.
56. Diffey BL, Cheeseman J. Sun protection with hats. Br J Dermatol 1992; 127:10–12.
57. Gies HP, Roy CR, McLennan A. Textiles and sun protection. In: Volkmer B, Heller H., eds.
Environmental UV Radiation, Risk of Skin Cancer and Primary Intervention. Stuttgart: Gustav
Fischer, 1996:213–234.
58. Dummer R, Osterwalder U. UV transmission of summer clothing in Switzerland and Germany.
Dermatology 2000; 200:82–83.
622
Lemper et al.

=== Page 640 ===
59. Menter JM, Hatch KL. Clothing as solar radiation protection. In: Elsner P, Hatch K, Wigger-Alberti W,
eds. Textiles and the Skin. Current Problems in Dermatology. Vol 31. Basel: Karger, 2003: 50–63.
60. Robinson JK, Rigel DS, Amonette RA. Summertime sun protection used by adults for their children.
J Am Acad Dermatol 2000; 42:746–753.
61. Diffey BL. Sunscreens: use and misuse. In: Giacomoni PU, ed. Sun Protection in Man. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science BV, 2001:521–534.
62. Cosmetic Toiletry & Fragrance Association (CTFA) South Africa, The European Cosmetic and Toiletry
Association (Colipa), Japan Cosmetic Industry Association, Cosmetic Toiletry & Fragrance Associ-
ation (CTFA) USA. International Sun Protection Factor (SPF) Test Method. May 2006.
63. Diffey BL. Has the sun protection factor had its day? BMJ 2000; 320:176–177.
64. Schlossman D, Shao Y. Inorganic ultraviolet filters. In: Shaath NA, ed. Sunscreens, Regulations and
Commercial Development. 3rd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor&Francis, 2005:240–276.
65. van der Molen RG, Hurks HMH, Out-Luiting C, et al. Efficacy of micronized titanium dioxide-
containing compounds in protection against UVB-induced immunosuppression in humans in vivo.
J Photochem Photobiol B 1998; 44:143–150.
66. SCCP Scientific Committee on Consumer Products: opinion on the safety of nanomaterials in cosmetic
products. Adopted by the SCCP after the public consultation on the 14th plenary meeting of
18 December 2007.
67. Commission Recommendation 2006/647/EC of 22 September 2006 on the efficacy of sunscreen
products and the claims made relating thereto. Official Journal 26/09/2006; L265:169–200.
68. Colipa guidelines. Guidelines for evaluating sun product water resistance, December 2005. Available
at:
http://www.colipa.com/site/index.cfm?SID¼15588&OBJ¼28522&back¼1.
Accessed
February 2008.
69. SCCNFP/0483/01, Final: opinion on the evaluation of potentially estrogenic effects of UV filters.
Adopted by the SCCNFP during the 17th plenary meeting of 12 June 2001.
70. Durrer S, Maerkel K, Schlumpf M, et al. Estrogen target gene regulation and coactivator expression in
rat uterus after developmental exposure to the ultraviolet filter 4-methylbenzylidene camphor.
Endocrinology 2005; 146:2130–2139.
71. Heneweer M, Muusse M, van den Berg M, et al. Additive estrogenic effects of mixtures of frequently
used UV filters on pS2-gene transcription in MCF-7 cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2005; 208:170–177.
72. Janjua NR, Mogensen B, Andersson AM, et al. Systemic absorption of the sunscreens benzophenone-3,
octyl-methoxycinnamate, and 3-(4-methyl-benzylidene) camphor after whole-body topical application
and reproductive hormone levels in humans. J Invest Dermatol 2004; 123:57–61.
73. Koda T, Umezu T, Ramata R, et al. Uterotrophic effects of benzophenone derivatives and a
p-hydroxybenzoate used in ultraviolet screens. Environ Res 2005; 98:40–45.
74. Schlecht C, Klammer H, Wuttke W, et al. A dose-response study on the estrogenic activity of
benzophenone-2 on various endpoints in the serum, pituitary and uterus of female rats. Arch Toxicol
2006; 80:656–661.
75. Schlumpf M, Cotton B, Conscience M, et al. In vitro and in vivo estrogenicity of UV screens. Environ
Health Perspect 2001; 109:239–244.
76. Schlumpf M, Jarry H, Wuttke W, et al. Estrogenic activity and estrogen receptor b binding of the UV
filter 3-benzylidene camphor. Comparison with 4 methylbenzylidene camphor. Toxicology 2004;
199:109–120.
77. Rogiers V. Validated (cosmetic) and suitable (REACH) alternative methods: is there a difference?
Course proceedings, Safety Assessment of Cosmetics in the EU, Brussels, February 4–6, 2008:199–224.
78. Atherton DJ. The aetiology and management of irritant diaper dermatitis. J Eur Acad Dermatol
Venereol 2001; 15(suppl 1):1–4.
79. Baldwin S, Odio MR, Haines SL, et al. Skin benefits from continuous topical administration of a zinc
oxide/petrolatum formulation by a novel disposable diaper. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2001;
15(suppl 1):5–11.
80. Mengesha YM, Bennett ML. Pustular skin disorders: diagnosis and treatment. Am J Clin Dermatol
2002; 3:389–400.
81. Wenzel FG, Horn TD. Non neoplastic disorders of the eccrine gland. J Am Dermatol 1998; 38:1–17.
Baby Care Products
623

=== Page 642 ===
61
Cosmetics for the Elderly
T. Blatt, G.-M- Muhr, and F. Sta¨b
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany
INTRODUCTION
Skin is the only organ, where signs of aging are evidently visible at the soonest in phenomena
such as wrinkle formation, loss of elasticity, uneven pigmentation, loss of moisture, increased
roughening, and cutaneous itching. Aging itself is understood as the result of a complex
interaction of biological processes that are caused by both genetic (chronological or intrinsic
aging) and environmental or behavioral processes (premature or extrinsic aging).
Current expansion of knowledge in modern bio-gerontology widely extends the theories
and explanations on mechanisms of aging. They are the basis for scientific approaches in
research, aiming to identify new concepts for antiaging treatment of skin. In terms of scientific
research activities, the skin’s accessibility to noninvasive and slightly invasive biophysical
measurements and procedures is definitely advantageous for studying underlying mecha-
nisms of cutaneous aging. In addition, experiments can also successfully be performed on
cultured skin cells or on three-dimensional cultured skin models.
Today, consumers of cosmetic products are increasingly expecting a deceleration,
cessation, or even a reversal of the underlying physiological processes contributing to the signs
of cutaneous aging. These advancing demands require state-of-the-art technological endeavors
in cosmetic research and formula development activities, with novel active ingredients, which
can perfectly exert their antiaging efficacy in optimized new-formula technologies.
PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES IN CUTANEOUS AGING
Unlike internal organs, the skin being the outermost protective barrier is particularly exposed
to external influences. As a result of environmental challenges, the aging process in skin is not
only influenced by genetic, intrinsic factors, but also accelerated to a far greater extent (80%) by
extrinsic factors, especially sun exposure (1). Intrinsic mechanisms of skin aging seem to be only
basically involved in formation of fine lines and shallow wrinkles in advanced age. Therefore
the research in cosmetic industry is focussed on the identification and qualification of new
active principles mainly to fight against extrinsic factors found to be harmful for the skin. One of
the most important fields of research is thereby the prevention and repair of sun-induced skin
damages, which can occur through several intracellular as well as extracellular mechanisms.
Reactive Oxygen Species
It is widely accepted that UVB irradiation causes DNA damage more or less directly, whereas
UVA light induces damages via the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in a more
indirect manner (2,3). During sun exposure, endogenous absorbers of UV light and
photosensitizers in human skin (riboflavine, porphyrine, tryptophan, urocanic acid, etc.) can
be involved in the generation of ROS. These UV-induced ROS are believed to be the main
factors for age-related damages in skin, apparent as deep wrinkles and furrows, which are
mechanistically summarized by the term “photo-aging.”
Dermal Changes
With increasing age and because of UV irradiation, aging skin shows an increasing imbalance
between assembly and breakdown of collagen—one of the primary compounds of the dermis—
toward breakdown. This results in an overall collagen decline of approximately 1% per year per
unit area of skin surface (4). The reasons for this are lower levels of new synthesized collagen, a
shift in the ratio of collagen types (5), and an increased activity of collagen-degrading enzymes
such as the collagenase MMP-1 (6). Aside from this, UV light also influences other important

=== Page 643 ===
dermal components such as elastin and glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). It causes the accumulation
of elastotic material, a nonfunctional mass of elastic fibers (7) and loss of GAGs in the dermis.
This lack of regeneration of the dermal connective tissue, i.e., structural reorganization of
collagen and elastin, decreased GAGs, together with a reduction in the tissue fluid content and
water-binding capacity, seems to play an important role in the formation of wrinkles. Even in
young skin, the regeneration of collagen (over the period of months) is a relatively slow process.
Thus the tensile characteristics of the skin are altered, so that it becomes generally thinner, less
elastic, and less resistant to stress. Phenotypically, this extrinsically caused and accelerated
premature skin aging is manifested in an advanced state as the formation of coarse, deep
furrows and folds, as well as aggravated elastoses. Even though the mechanisms of both
extrinsic and intrinsic skin aging cause a fundamental change in the appearance of the skin, the
contribution of the extrinsic portion, however, seems to be predominant.
Epidermal Changes
A characteristic feature of aging skin is the declining ability to regenerate, being particularly
evident in the longer time span needed for renewal of the epidermal layer. This so-called
epidermal turnover takes about 28 days in young adult skin and may increase to 40 to 60 days
with age (8). Furthermore, as skin gets older the UV-induced tanning intensity becomes more
irregular, but the scientific knowledge about the physiology on development of age spots or
melasma is still insufficient. The appearance of age spots can be a result of the decreasing
ability of melanocytes to distribute the produced melanin packets (melanosomes) to the
surrounding keratinocytes equally, or a localized overproduction of melanin. One can only
speculate whether this is primarily caused by an uneven distribution of melanocytes in skin or
rather a dysregulation of physiological processes in melanocytes.
Other Aspects
Furthermore the process of premature skin aging leads to an impairment of the denticulation
of the epidermal/dermal junction zone and to a reduction in the number of so-called papillae,
each of which harbors a blood capillary growing out of the dermis. These structural changes
are considered as histological hallmarks of aging skin morphology, which is accompanied by
the reduction of the capillary diameter, as well as capillary density in aged skin (9). A well-
functioning blood capillary system contributes to an adequate nutrient supply to the upper
skin layers, and thus to the structural integrity and complexion of skin.
The immunological defense system is also significantly reduced with increasing age.
Thus intensive sun exposure can promote neoplastic cell transformation (e.g., melanoma) and
the incidence of skin tumors increase with age. As a consequence protection of skin of all ages
against the negative effects of sun irradiation is the most important task in keeping skin
healthy and young. Often described and subjectively felt, dry aged skin cannot be only
attributed to the distinctive defect of the epidermal water barrier of the horny layer. Rather, it
can be attributed to regenerative processes, as well as a worsening in the water storage
capacity, caused by a diminished production of cutaneous moisturization factors (e.g., amino
acids, hyaluronic acid, pyrrolidon carbon acid, and glycerine) able to bind water in the horny
layer. Besides the reduced water-retention capacity, the age-dependent reduction in sebum
secretion of the sebaceous glands also plays a role in the formation of dry aged skin. As the
sebaceous glands seem to be predominantly hormonally regulated, age-dependent decline and
changes in the hormonal system worsen condition and function of aged skin.
An overt example of the endocrine influence on skin aging is the exacerbation of dry skin
and increased wrinkle formation that occur with menopausal hormonal changes, and
specialized hormone treatments can lead to an improvement of old skin. These new scientific
insights have facilitated a scientific merging in the fields of dermatology and endocrinology.
ACTIVE COSMETIC INGREDIENTS AND THEIR POTENTIAL
Aging consumers experiencing dry skin tend to favor rich skin-care formulations that include
moisturizers with high water-binding properties, e.g., glycerine. Increasingly, modern cosmetics
attempt to satisfy these consumer demands for products with preventative or even
regenerative performance. Besides preventing early skin aging, products must also smooth
626
Blatt et al.

=== Page 644 ===
or improve the appearance of wrinkles as well as retard the weakened regenerative potential of
the skin (epidermal turnover). Modern skin research in cosmetic industry has already revealed
several ways to specifically target the biological needs of aged skin.
In addition, to avoid intensive sun exposure, protection of the skin against UV-
dependent oxidative stress can be provided by the use of products with highly efficient
UV filter technologies. It has to be considered that older skin is even more sensitive to UV
exposure. Because of the age-dependent atrophy of the skin (10) UV radiation penetrates more
deeply and damages increase and can accumulate. This effect leads to a need for high
photoprotection, so product formulations should employ an efficient UVA/B filter combina-
tion. Besides UVB protection, which delivers erythemal protection, UVA filter performance
plays a decisive role in the prevention of photoaging, because UVA radiation is a key factor in
the production of ROS and the subsequent activation of collagen degrading enzymes.
As physiological events in skin are based on physical and chemical processes including
redox-cascades, the skin has developed an antioxidative defense system as a direct protective
barrier against endogenous and exogenous environmental oxidative stress factors (e.g., UV-
light). These endogenous antioxidative protectants of enzymatic and nonenzymatic anti-
oxidant systems (11) are concentrated to a higher value in the epidermis compared with that in
the dermis. Substances such as flavonoids, vitamins A, C, and E, coenzyme Q10, as well as
carotinoids, are components of a healthy diet and can replenish and support the cutaneous
system in its protective function. Topical application of substances such as vitamins E and C as
well as, in particular, the plant-derived flavonoid derivative, a-glycosylrutin (AGR), show a
large protective potential against premature UV light–induced skin aging (12). This positive
activity, however, preempts that topically applied antioxidants will adequately interact with
the natural endogenous redox system of the skin. Therefore, not all of the known oxidative
substances achieve the desired protective effect when applied to the skin. The water-soluble
and thus bio-available flavonoid AGR can build up a skin-protective depot in the living layer
of the skin, in which the inherent glutathione redox system protects against oxidative damage
and UV-induced inflammation is reduced (12–14). Similarly, the water-soluble antioxidant
vitamin C can, among other activities, function as a co-factor in the collagen synthesis thereby
supporting skin regeneration in deeper layers. Knowing the causative involvement of UV-
induced oxidative stress reactions in the cutaneous aging process (15), the best prevention and
radical modulation can be reached, and to some extent improved, by providing focused,
customized topical treatment strategies.
For treatment of age-damaged skin, particularly for antiscaleness and antiwrinkle
efficacy, countless principles are available on the market, which are based on the removal of
the outer horny layers of skin (exfoliation or peelings). Commonly used agents are so-called
a-hydroxy acids (AHAs), most often endogenous metabolites (lactate) or other naturally
occurring substances such as fruit acids. Depending on the substance used, the respective
depth of treatment in skin can be determined by adjusting the topical concentration and
treatment time applied. The activity of these agents is generally based on induction of skin
regeneration by exfoliation and subclinical inflammation, which appears to be comparative to
a superficial wound-healing process.
Several antiaging actives are proven to have beneficial effects on skin aging. Vitamin A
and its derivatives have been used as active ingredients in the cosmetic industry for many
years. Their activity is essentially based on the interaction of specific nuclear receptors, whose
activation regulates, e.g., collagen synthesis, improving the structure of the skin. Regrettably,
besides concentration-dependent skin irritant properties, these vitamin A ingredients are also
highly sensitive to light-dependent and oxidative processes, greatly reducing their activities.
New cyclodextrine-based formulation technologies enable the efficient stabilization of these
active ingredients without limiting their activity (16).
All cells, and thus also skin cells, need energy. It is needed to grow, for protection and
repair and most important for regeneration and cell division. To maintain this capacity for
cellular life the mitochondria, small intracellular organelles operating as small power plants in
the cells, are imperative. Besides the mitochondrial energy supply, cells also have a system
named “the creatine/phospho-creatine pathway.” According to latest insights findings, this
occurs in the human skin and is responsible for an extremely fast energy supply (17).
Creatine as well as another energy metabolite, co-enzyme Q10, can both be synthesized
in human cells, but from the age of about 30, a reduction in the cellular concentration of these
Cosmetics for the Elderly
627

=== Page 645 ===
compounds in the skin can be determined (18). As a fat-soluble oxidative substance, co-
enzyme Q10 protects the cell membrane and organelles (19). It especially plays a role in the
electron transport system during the energy production (ATP) in cellular respiration of the
mitochondria, preventing a chronic energy deficiency in aging cells (20). The topical
application of co-enzyme Q10 and creatine, respectively, can activate countless synthetic
processes, ultimately resulting in a reduction of wrinkle depth by balancing energy deficits
(21). Besides this, the regeneration activity of aged skin can be stimulated by the external
application of these active ingredients.
There are different causes, why skin can become irritated. Independent of age, skin is
more sensitive to irritation in cold, dry winter, than in summer. Especially people with so-
called sensitive skin have to protect their skin against dryness, intensive sun exposure,
mechanical stress, and environmental noxiousness. But also, age-related old skin is reported to
be more sensitive to irritation due to restricted defense and repair mechanisms. As a
consequence, a prophylactic anti-inflammatory treatment appears to be recommendable for
skin of elderly.
Special skin-care regimens adapted to the specific needs of sensitive skin are developed
and provided by the cosmetic industry. Actives isolated from herbal extracts (e.g., licochalcone
A) proved to be effective against mechanical stress such as razor burn, but can also be effective
in skin care for dry atopic skin or Rosacea.
PERSPECTIVES
The physiology of skin aging is a complex, multifaceted, and dynamic phenomenon. Even
though many molecular causes of the aging process are not understood in complete detail,
there is consensus that chronological age alone is not crucial to this process.
In the future, the application of modern molecular and biological methods in skin
research such as the DNA chip technology (micro-arrays) and the proteomic technology will
allow new insight in the aging process—genes and gene products involved with their genetic
control mechanisms. These new technologies, the accessibility of the skin, and the improved
possibilities to culture in vivo resembling skin models, will increasingly contribute to a better
understanding of the regulation of the intrinsic and extrinsic aging process, and the positive
effects of topically applied age-specific agents. In the long term, these technologies can provide
new fundamental knowledge about the control mechanisms of the human aging process as a
whole.
REFERENCES
1. Godar DE. UV doses worldwide. Photochem Photobiol 2005; 81(4):736–749.
2. Peak MJ, Peak JG. Solar ultraviolet effects on mammalian cell DNA. In: Fuchs J, Packer L, eds.
Oxidative Stress in Dermatology. New York, Basel, Hong Kong: Marcel Dekker, 1993:169–186.
3. de Gruijl FR. Photocarcinogenesis. UVA versus UVB. Meth Enzymol 2000; 319:359–366. Medline, ISI
4. Shuster S, Black MM, McVitie E. The influence of age and sex on skin thickness, skin collagen, and
density. Br J Dermatol 1975; 93(6):639–643.
5. Oikarinen A. The aging of skin: chronoaging versus photoaging. Photodermatol Photoimmunol
Photomed 1990; 7(1):3–4.
6. Fisher GJ, Datta SC, Talwar HS, et al. Molecular basis of sun-induced premature skin ageing and
retinoid antagonism. Nature 1996; 379:335–339.
7. Mitchell RE. Chronic solar dermatosis: a light and electron microscopic study of the dermis. J Invest
Dermatol 1967; 48(3):203–220.
8. Kligman AM. Perspectives and problems in cutaneous gerontology. J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):39–46.
9. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen 2001; 98(10):1091–1095.
10. Luger A. The skin in the elderly. Z Gerontol 1988; 21(5):264–266.
11. Vessey DA. The cutaneous antioxidant system. In: Fuchs J, Packer L, eds. Oxidative Stress in
Dermatology. New York, Basel, Hongkong: Marcel Dekker Inc., 1993:81–103.
12. Sta¨b F. a-Glucosylrutin: an innovative antioxidant in skin protection. SO¨ FW-Journal, 2000; 127:2–8.
13. Hadshiew I. Effects of topically applied antioxidants in experimentally provoked polymorphous light
eruption (PLE). Dermatology 1997; 195:362–368.
628
Blatt et al.

=== Page 646 ===
14. Sta¨b F. Topically applied antioxidants in skin protection. In: Packer L, Sies H, eds. Methods in
Enzymology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2000:465–478.
15. Scharffetter-Kochanek K. UV-induced reactive oxygen species in photocarcinogenesis and photo-
aging. Biol Chem 1997; 378:1247–1257.
16. Raschke T. Encapsulation technologies in cosmetics. SO¨ FW-Journal 2003; 129:73–78.
17. Lenz H. The creatine kinase system in human skin: protective effects of creatine against oxidative and
UV damage in vitro and in vivo. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 124(2):443–452.
18. Kalen A. Age-related changes in the lipid composition of rat and human tissues. Lipids 1989; 24:579–584.
19. Frei B. Ubiquinol-10 is an effective lipid-soluble antioxidant at physiological concentrations. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1990; 87:4879–4883.
20. Hoppe U. Coenzyme Q10, a cutaneous antioxidant and energizer. Biofactors 1999; 9(2–4):371–378.
21. Blatt T. Stimulation of skin’s energy metabolism provides multiple benefits for mature human skin.
Biofactors 2006; 25(11–14):179–185.
Cosmetics for the Elderly
629

=== Page 648 ===
62
Antiperspirants
Jo¨rg Schreiber
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany
INTRODUCTION
This chapter presents an overview concerning the current knowledge of antiperspirant actives
and their interactions with the human axilla. It is my intention to give the interested reader a
short introduction about formulation work, drug delivery systems, and application forms
developed for antiperspirant actives. The final section lists references that should be useful for
anyone who wants to learn more about a specific topic of antiperspirant technology.
BIOLOGY OF SWEAT GLANDS IN THE HUMAN AXILLA
The axilla region of humans contains apocrine, eccrine, and sebaceous glands. Approximately
25,000 sweat glands/axilla can produce up to 12 g sweat/hr (1). The current understanding
concerning the structure and function of sweat glands is that thermoregulation is the only aspect
of the body participating in immunological, metabolic, and hormonal aspects of human life (2).
Eccrine Glands
This is the gland responsible for the majority of sweat production. It has a sensory and an
excretory function and can be stimulated by emotional and thermal stimuli (3). It produces
clear, colorless, and odorless liquid containing 98% to 99% water and 1% to 2% inorganic and
organic compounds (4). Inorganic components include NaCl and traces of Kþ, Ca2þ, Mg2þ, Fe3þ,
and Cu2þ ions. Organic components include lactic acid, citric acid, formic acid, propionic acid,
butyric acid, urea, and ammonia. Underarm wetness comes mostly from the secretion of eccrine
glands. Antiperspirants reduce the amount of sweat only from eccrine glands.
Apocrine Glands
Apocrine glands are apparently a relic from the phylogenetic development of man. These
glands start to produce a milky, viscous fluid during puberty on special locations of the body,
especially the underarm pit (5). In contrast to eccrine glands, the openings of the glands are not
at the skin surface but appear at the hair follicle. Decomposition of apocrine sweat by skin
bacteria is responsible for the characteristic malodor of human sweat. Apocrine sweat consists
of, besides water, proteins, carbohydrates, and ammonium salts (6). Other investigators have
reported that these glands secrete lipids, cholesterol, and steroids (7). Furthermore, it has been
shown that androgen-converting enzymes in the apocrine glands are responsible for
circulating androgens to dihydrotestosterone (5).
ANTIPERSPIRANTS
Antiperspirants are topically applied products designed to reduce underarm wetness by
limiting eccrine sweat production. In the United States, these products are regulated by the
Food and Drug administration (FDA) as over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, because they are
intended to affect a ‘‘function of the body’’ (i.e., in this context, perspiration). Products
containing antiperspirant actives have to reduce perspiration to minimum 20% in 50% of the
test population under validated test conditions. Test protocols (in vivo clinical trials), to
develop a safe and an effective product, have been designed to substantiate the desired claims
(8–14).
Comparative quantitative determination of the activity of sweat glands on the forearm
after application of aluminum chlorohydrate (ACH) solutions is now possible by combining

=== Page 649 ===
the classic starch iodine visualization technique with digital image analysis (15). A noninvasive
optical technique that allows the analysis of the function of a number of glands,
simultaneously, in vivo was recently reported (16). A new method for parallel testing of up
to eight formulations on the backs of volunteers allows a very fast evaluation of product
prototypes (1).
Sweat Reduction by Antiperspirants: Current Model/Theory
The reader should be aware that theories concerning the action of sweat-reducing agents
depend strongly on the type of actives (aluminum salts, nonionic agents, or ionic agents). The
efficacy of antiperspirants based on aluminum and/or aluminum zirconium salts can be
understood by the formation of an occlusive plug of metal hydroxide in the eccrine duct (17).
Tape-stripping experiments followed by analysis of transmission electron micrographs of an
ACH-treated eccrine sweat gland duct show an obstructive amorphous material supporting
the theory of a mechanical blockage of sweat glands from diffusion of the soluble ACH
solution into the sweat gland and subsequent neutralization to a polymeric aluminum
hydroxide gel (18,19). There seems to be no correlation concerning the efficacy of aluminum
salts and the location of the plug in the duct, because it is known that, compared with ACH,
the more effective Al-Zr compounds do not penetrate as deep as the, also highly effective,
AlCl3 solutions (17). The reader is referred to the literature concerning other theories of sweat
reduction by aluminum salts (20).
Active Ingredients for Controlling Underarm Wetness—State of the Art
Buffered Aluminum Salts (ACH)
The first antiperspirant, Ever Dry, based on AlCl3, was introduced to the market in 1903 (21).
The first cream-containing aluminum sulfate was introduced during the 1930s. The acidic pH
value (2.5–3.0) was a drawback of these products, leading to skin irritation in the underarm pit.
History tells us that the development of antiperspirant actives with a higher pH value, so-
called buffered aluminum chlorides (ACH, pH ¼ 4.0–4.2), was an appropriate step with the
additional benefit of reduced destruction of fabric clothes. The formula of this buffering salt is
[Al2(OH)5]þ þ (Cl), or more conveniently Al2(OH)5Cl.
The historical development from AlCl3 to Al2(OH)5Cl can be easily understood by the
following consideration:
AlClj ¼ xh Al2Cl6 ðsubstitute 5 Cl ions against OH ionsÞ ¼>
Al2ðOHÞ5Cl
Al2(OH)5Cl is a 5/6 basic aluminum trichloride. The accepted definition of ACH is the
ratio of Al to Cl ¼ 2.1 to 1.0. Lower levels lead to ACH [Al2(OH)4Cl2] or to aluminum
sesquichlorohydrate [Al2(OH)4.5Cl1.5]—both actives are also generally regarded as safe
(GRAS). ACH is supplied as a powder or a 50% solution in water. It can be formulated up
to 25%, calculated on an anhydrous basis. The 20% aqueous solution reduces perspiration by
35% to 40% on average (22). Some dyes used in clothing may be acid sensitive and will change
color when in contact with an antiperspirant.
The structure of the Lewis acid ACH is very complex, because ACH in water forms the
so-called isopolyoxo cations with chloride ions as counterions (23–25). There exist several
polymer equilibria of the polycationic aluminum species in water-based systems. Short-chain
polycationic species are more effective in reducing sweat.
Aluminum Zirconium Chlorohydrate—Glycine Complexes (AZG or ZAG)
AZG is obtained by reaction of ACH with zirconylchloride. Reaction of the former ingredient
in the presence of glycine leads to ZAG complexes. Glycine is used as a buffering agent. These
antiperspirant actives form very complex polymeric structures in water. The actives are
defined by the ratio of Al þ Zr metal-to-chloride ratio and the Al-Zr atomic ratio. The
interested reader is referred to the literature concerning available antiperspirant actives (26,27)
and nomenclature of the Al-Zr complexes (21,22). These antiperspirant actives were developed
especially for anhydrous formulations because they show, compared with ACH, enhanced
sweat reduction (28–30). The maximal concentration of ZAG calculated on an anhydrous basis
is 20%. They are not allowed to be formulated for use in aerosols.
632
Schreiber

=== Page 650 ===
New Concepts for Controlling Underarm Wetness
Titanium Metal Chelates
The understanding of the complex solution chemistry of aluminum-based antiperspirants gave
input to the search for alternative antiperspirant salts. Titanium derivatives, like partially
neutralized ammonium titanium lactate (ATL) salts, were shown to be effective in in vitro
efficacy tests (31). The titanium metal chelates can be synthesized from the corresponding
titanium alkoxides and organic acids allowed by neutralization with ammonia. Under acidic to
neutral pH conditions, the ATL active seems to be relatively stable to hydrolysis, and therefore
probably is a suitable antiperspirant active in water-based or anhydrous drug delivery systems.
Film-Forming Antiperspirant Polymers
The so-called polybarrier technology is another approach to reduce perspiration by using a
polymer that forms an insoluble occlusive film barrier on the underarm skin (32). It was
mentioned that the occlusive film is a barrier to the passage of moisture. The main advantages
of this technology are reduced skin irritation, applicable after underarm shaving, and higher
sweat reduction compared with today’s classic antiperspirant salts. The preferred polymer is
an olefinic acid amide/olefinic acid or ester copolymer–like octylacrylamide/acrylate
copolymer (Versacryl-40). This copolymer can be used alone or in combination with PVP/
eicosene copolymer in sticks, roll-ons, or alcohol-based products (33). The reduction of sweat
depends on the choice of vehicle and extends in some formulations to 40%.
Lyotropic Liquid Crystals
Certain surfactant/cosurfactant combinations form in water depending on the variables of
concentration/temperature instead of micelles’ lamellar, hexagonal, inverted hexagonal,
inverted micellar, or even cubic phases. The cubic phases can be of micellar or bicontinuous
type (34). The water domains in lamellar or cubic phases can swell to a certain degree, while
taking up water. The use of this swelling behavior is the basis of a patent where a surfactant/
cosurfactant combination is applied to the underarm pit (35). Sweat (water) transfers the
applied composition to a lyotropic liquid crystal of cubic structure, thus creating a sweat-
absorbing system in the axilla. Oleic acid/glycerol monolaurate is one of the surfactant
combinations in the patent. Both components are also well known as deodorizers.
DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS AND APPLICATION FORMS FOR
ANTIPERSPIRANT ACTIVES
Antiperspirant actives can be formulated in a variety of delivery systems like anhydrous
suspensions, water-or hydroalcoholic-based solutions, and emulsions. Typical application
forms for antiperspirants are sticks, roll-ons, creams, pump sprays, aerosols, gels, and
powders. On a global basis, the three most important product forms are sticks, roll-ons, and
aerosols.
Formulation Work
After the decision for the desired application form has been made, the formulator has to decide
on the vehicle system for the antiperspirant active. It is the intent of this section to summarize
some of the current knowledge concerning the influence of actives with the formula, efficacy of
different delivery systems, and the function of the ingredients used in antiperspirants.
Antiperspirant actives, like ACH or ZAG complexes, are soluble in water. Application of
a concentrated aqueous solution of an antiperspirant active gives a rather tacky feeling (36).
Reduction of tackiness can be best achieved by silicone oils (cyclomethicones) or ester oils like
di-(2 ethylhexyl) adipate (27). The acidic pH value (4.0–4.2) has to be taken into account by
selecting additional components for the desired drug delivery system. Loss of viscosity and
problems of a final formula with color stability are often hints to change the gellant and/or
perfume. Aluminum powders in anhydrous systems (aerosols and suspension sticks) often
leave visible white residues on skin or clothing. Liquid emollients, like (PPG)-14 butylether or
the aforementioned adipate ester, minimize these residues. Another approach is to use the
solid emollient isosorbide monolaurate (ICI, Arlamol1 ISML) (37). In anhydrous aerosol
formulations, the ACH powder settles down and forms a hard-to-redisperse cake at the bottom
Antiperspirants
633

=== Page 651 ===
of the aerosol can. Suspending aids, like quaternium-18 hectorite or quaternium-18 bentonite,
prevent settling of the antiperspirant active and additionally thicken the cyclomethicone oil
phase. Usage of fine powders of ACH is another approach to overcome nature’s law of gravity.
The reader should be aware that hydrophobic ingredients, like emollients, have an
influence on the effectiveness of an antiperspirant active, because a cosmetic oil phase or wax
can cover the pores of the eccrine duct. The efficacy of an antiperspirant active, like ACH, is
higher in water-containing systems compared with anhydrous formulations. The following
rules concerning efficacy might be helpful:
1.
Efficacy: aqueous solution > anhydrous suspension.
2.
As diffusion of an antiperspirant active in the vehicle and from the vehicle to the skin
after application has to be considered, one can further differentiate the expected
efficacy trends. Efficacy: aqueous solution > sprayable O/W emulsion > O/W
emulsion roll-on > O/W emulsion cream.
3.
It is accepted that antiperspirant actives in the outer phase of an emulsion have a
higher efficacy than in the dispersed phase. Efficacy: O/W emulsion > W/O
emulsion.
4.
In water-free systems, the viscosity of the drug delivery system might be of
relevance. Suspended ACH in anhydrous vehicles needs to be solubilized after
application to the axilla by sweat (water). The effectiveness of suspension sticks
depends on the rapidity of active solubilization. The usage of ultrafine powders of
ACH is expected to boost efficacy compared with fine powders. Efficacy: low viscous
suspension > suspension stick.
The reader is referred to the literature concerning vehicle effects on antiperspirant
activity (7,38,39).
Lipophilic ingredients might have an influence on the efficacy of a product, because it is
known that the water-soluble propylene glycol can form complexes or hydrogen bonds with
aluminum polycationic species thereby altering the efficacy of the salt (40). Also, propylene
glycol in high concentrations may result in skin irritations (41). Successful formulation work
aims at finding the right viscosity for the product in the desired application form, a lower
viscosity during the flow into the underarm pit, and a higher viscosity after application so that
the product stays where it was applied. Conventional shear shinning flow curves are
characteristic for antiperspirant products. The reader is referred to the literature concerning
rheology aspects of cosmetic products (42).
Deodorant/Antiperspirant Sticks
It is at present not easy to give the reader an overview about sticks, because nowadays there exist
many technologies to develop this solid delivery system. In Figure 1, an attempt was made to
summarize this area. In the following section, only systems of major importance are discussed.
Sticks can be divided into different classes like suspension sticks, gel sticks, and emulsion
sticks. Soft sticks have some properties of all the three categories (Fig. 1).
Suspension Sticks
Dry deodorants, or antiperspirant solids, are synonyms for an application form where the
active in the form of a powder is suspended in a silicone oil phase. Stearyl alcohol is usually
used as the hardening agent. The molten mass crystallizes into a matrix of stearyl alcohol
saturated with the silicone oil and suspended particles (43,44). Quaternium-18 hectorite can
reduce the settling of the actives. Cyclomethicones give the stick a dry, silky feel; nonvolatile
oils, like PPG-14 butylether, minimize white residues on the skin (43). Low-residue sticks can
be obtained by using a combination of high-and low-melting waxes and a volatile and
nonvolatile silicone-oil combination (45) (Table 1).
Gel Sticks
This class can be subdivided into the following groups: white anhydrous gel sticks, clear
anhydrous gel sticks, and clear water-based soap gel sticks. The last class mentioned is
discussed in chapter 63.
634
Schreiber

=== Page 652 ===
White Anhydrous Gel Sticks
Shear solids, or ultraclear solids, are synonyms for sticks with improved washout performance
compared with the classic suspension sticks. They contain N-acyl amino acid amides
(N-lauroyl-L-glutamic acid dibutylamide) and 12-hydroxyacid as gelling agents for an oil phase
mixture (e.g., silicone oil/mineral oil). The washout agent is an ethoxylated solubilizer, like
Ceteareth-20. These white sticks turn clear after application to the skin (no-residue stick) (46).
Clear Anhydrous Gel Sticks
They are quite popular in the United States, because clarity is associated by the consumer with
a lack of white residue on skin, no dangerous ingredients, and high efficacy. A typical gelling
agent is dibenzylidene sorbitol [dibenzylaldehyde monosorbitol acetal, (DBMS A)]. This acetal
is not stable in an acidic aqueous environment (47). The sticks usually contain a high level of
alcohol and/or polyols. At high polyol concentration, the active is regarded to be solubilized
instead of suspended in the gel matrix (48). An alternative gelling agent is a polyamide (49)
(Table 2).
Emulsion Sticks
They can be grouped into clear O/W emulsions, white W/O emulsions, and clear W/S
emulsion gels. The last mentioned is discussed below.
Table 1
Suspension stick
Wt%
Stearyl alcohol
20.0
Cyclomethicone
54.0
PPG-14 butylether
2.0
Hydrogenated castor oil
1.0
Talc
2.0
Antiperspirant
20.0
Fragrance
1.0
Abbreviation: PPG, photoplethysmography.
Figure 1
Overview of cosmetic deo/antiperspirant sticks.
Antiperspirants
635

=== Page 653 ===
Clear O/W Emulsions
They contain a high surfactant combination with the active solubilized in the external water
phase. The high concentration of surfactants is a disadvantage; no products based on this
technology are known to the author (47).
W/O Emulsion Sticks
The water phase containing the active is solubilized by a surfactant, like polyglycerol-4
isostearate. A typical example for an oil/wax phase combination is a mixture of silicone oil/
stearyl alcohol (50) (Table 3).
Soft Sticks (Soft Solids, Smooth-Ons)
These sticks can be differentiated into two subgroups, namely, white, anhydrous creams
(suspensions), and clear water-in-silicone emulsion gels. Both delivery systems are packed in a
container that gives the impression of a stick. The suspension or gel is extruded onto the skin
from holes in the top of the stick container to a wide smooth area around the holes.
White, Anhydrous Creams
These creams contain an antiperspirant active, a volatile and nonvolatile silicone oil, and a
thickener (N-acyl glutamic acid amide).
Clear Water-in-Silicone Emulsion Gels
These formulations can be achieved by adjusting the refractive index of the water and silicone-
oil phase. Silicone formulation aids (Dow Corning 3225 C) are mixtures of cyclomethicone and
dimethicone copolyol helping to solubilize the active (7,46,48,51). Low surface tension of
cyclomethicones facilitates good spreading of a product on the skin and reduces the tackiness
of antiperspirant actives.
Antiperspirant Roll-Ons
Roll-on products can be differentiated into several categories (Fig. 2). O/W emulsion-based
delivery systems are quite popular in Europe, whereas anhydrous suspension roll-ons or
Table 2
White anhydrous gel sticks
Wt%
Clear anhydrous gel sticks
Wt%
N-lauroyl-L-glutamic acid dibutyl amide
5.0
Dibenzylidene sorbitol
2.0
12-Hydroxystearic acid
5.0
Dimethicone copolyol
2.0
Cyclomethicone
40.0
Di-isopropyl sebacate
2.0
Hydrogenated Polyisobutene
15.0
Glycine
1.0
Di-isopropyl myristate
15.0
Dipropyleneglycol
10.0
Antiperspirant powder
20.0
Propyleneglycol
33.0
Antiperspirant powder
50.0
Source: From Ref. 58.
Table 3
W/O emulsion stick
Wt%
Stearyl alcohol
19.0
Volatile silicone
26.0
Mineral oil
1.0
2-Methyl-2,4 pentandiol
2.0
Polyglycerol-4 isostearate
2.0
ACH solution (50%)
50.0
Abbreviation: ACH, aluminum chlorohydrate.
Source: From Ref. 50.
636
Schreiber

=== Page 654 ===
transparent water-in-silicone emulsions are preferred in the United States. A new trend
concerning the size of the roll-on applicator has been identified. Consumers prefer the big-ball
format (3.0–3.5 cm), because of the ease of applying the product to the underarm pit (52). The
popularity of roll-ons, in general, is because of the nongreasy and nonoily feel in the axilla and
the good spreadability of the content on the underarm skin.
Clear Hydroalcoholic Roll-On
This delivery system contains a water/alcohol solution of the antiperspirant active thickened
with a water-soluble polymer like hydroxyethylcellulose. The alcohol in the formula gives,
compared with the clear aqueous solution-based roll-ons, a fresh sensation in the axilla and
facilitates drying of the product. Excellent antiperspirant efficacy is another benefit of
hydroalcoholic roll-ons.
O/W Emulsion Roll-On
This delivery system uses ethoxylated surfactants, like PEG-40 stearate, to solubilize an oil
phase like mineral oil. The active is dissolved in the outer phase, allowing the formulation of a
highly effective product. In alcohol-free formulated systems, microbiological stability has to be
checked (Table 4).
W/O Emulsion Roll-On
They are weaker in efficacy because the actives are encapsulated and the external oil phase
often gives a sticky feeling.
W/Si Emulsion Roll-On
Silicone oils allow products to formulate on the basis of a “W/O technology,” because the skin
feel is not comparable with traditional oily components, like ester oils or triglycerides. The
concentration of the thickener is reduced compared with sticks based on this type. The
technology is discussed under soft sticks (see p. 636).
Figure 2
Overview of cosmetic deo/antiperspirant roll-on types.
Table 4
O/W emulsion roll-on
Wt%
Hydroalcoholic roll-on
Wt%
PEG-40 stearate
5.0
Antiperspirant active
20.0
Cetyl alcohol
3.0
PPG-5 ceteareth-20
2.0
Mineral oil
2.0
Water
35.4
Polysorbate-80
1.0
Ethanol
42.1
Glycerin
1.5
Hydroxyethylcellulose
0.5
Magnesium-aluminum silicate
0.8
Antiperspirant active
20.0
Water
66.7
Abbreviations: PPG, photoplethysmography; Mg, magnesium.
Antiperspirants
637

=== Page 655 ===
O/W Micro-Emulsion Gel
An alternative approach to transparent products uses the phase inversion temperature (PIT)
technology. A suitable mixture of surfactants, oils, and water is heated from 608C to 908C to
give a W/O emulsion above the PIT. During cooling, the mixture shows phase inversion
to give white or transparent O/W emulsions; O/W micro-emulsion gels are obtained in
the presence of hydrophobically modified water-soluble polymers (53). The technology is
explained in more detail in chapter 63.
Suspension Roll-On
The antiperspirant active in powder form is suspended in cylomethicone. The roll-on can be
formulated with or without ethanol. Quaternium-18 hectorite is used as a thickener to prevent
settling of the active. Consumers in the United States prefer this delivery system, as it does not
give a wet feeling after application and because of the easy drying (39). Actives like ZAG
complexes give high efficacy to underarm products (Table 5).
Antiperspirant Aerosols
Aerosols, in Europe and Asia, are popular delivery systems for consumers who prefer a
hygienic and easy-to-use application form. Typical ingredients for aerosols include isopropyl
myristate, isopropyl palmitate, volatile silicone, dimethicone, silica, clays, propylene
carbonate, and ethanol. Propellants include propane, butane, and isobutane (Table 6).
As acidic aqueous ACH solutions lead to corrosion of the aerosol can, current aerosol
antiperspirant products are formulated as water-free suspensions. The active is suspended as a
powder in an oil phase like cyclomethicone or in a mixture of ester oils/cyclomethicone.
Agglomeration of solid particles and settling of actives can be minimized by the usage of
suspending agents like fumed silica (amorphous silicon dioxide) or clays (bentonite and
hectorite). The clays form a weak gel in the presence of an oil phase that can be destroyed by
shaking the aerosol can before usage. The gel structure is reformed on standing, thereby
holding the active in suspension. Because the organoclays are agglomerated, shear is needed to
deagglomerate the platelets, and a polar activator like propylene carbonate or ethanol is used
to disperse them and induce the gelation of the oil phase.
The steps involved to prepare an aerosol product can be summarized in the following
sequence (7):
1.
Preparing bentonite or hectorite clay with the emollient in the presence of the polar
activator and shearing the mixture.
2.
Adding the antiperspirant active until a uniform agglomeration-free suspension is
obtained.
3.
Filling the concentrate into the aerosol can and adding the propellant (pressure
filling).
Table 5
Suspension roll-on
Wt%
Volatile silicone
65.0
Quaternium-18 hectorite
13.5
Silica
0.5
Antiperspirant powder
20.0
Fragrance
1.0
Table 6
Antiperspirant aerosol
Wt%
Volatile silicone
13.4
Quaternium-18 hectorite
0.8
Ethanol
0.8
Antiperspirant powder
10.0
Propellant (butane/propane)
75.0
638
Schreiber

=== Page 656 ===
Efficacy studies of aerosols, including comparison with other drug delivery systems,
have been reported in the literature (30). ZAG complexes are not allowed to be used in
aerosols.
Environmental Issues
Aerosols contain volatile organic compounds (VOCs) usually in a weight ratio of propellant to
concentrate of 75:25 (54). The environmental impact of VOC, like the reaction with NOX, in the
presence of sunlight causes formation of unwanted ozone in the lower atmosphere. U.S.
antiperspirant companies especially were forced to reduce VOC emissions by reformulating
hydrocarbon propellants and/or exchanging hydrocarbon propellants with the fluorohydro-
carbons, 1,1 difluorethane (Propellant 152 a) or 1,1,2,2 tetrafluorethane (Propellant 134 a). The
water-soluble dimethoxyethane (DME) is another propellant that is thought to have no impact
on the damage of the ozone layer (55).
The current trends in the aerosol market can be summarized as follows:
l higher ratio of concentrate/hydrocarbon propellant
l higher amount of silicone oils
l usage of 1,1 difluorethane (Propellant 152 a)
l formulations with lower vapor pressure
l usage of smaller aerosol cans
Aerosols containing 20% to 50% propellants with a concentrate-propellant ratio from
1.0 to 1.0 to 2.3 to 1.0 have been patented (56).
FUTURE TRENDS
Some new trends in the antiperspirant field concerning new actives and delivery systems have
been described in this chapter. Improvements of current formulations and innovative concepts
will need the ongoing investigation and better understanding of the interaction of active/
vehicle and vehicle/skin. Improving efficacy and skin compatibility is another major trend in
the antiperspirant field. New packaging concepts, like the extrudable gels, the big-ball
applicator for roll-ons, and reduced-size aerosol cans with ozone-friendly propellants, are
probably, in a few years, the state of the art. The influence of perfume components to the skin
and the increasing rate of contact allergies attributable to fragrance ingredients have to be
closely monitored (57).
REFERENCES
1. Bielfeldt S, Frase T, Gassmiiller J. New sensitive method for assessment of antiperspirants with
intraindividual comparison of eight formulations. SOFW 1997; 1237:639–642.
2. Gebhardt W. Do cutaneous coryneform bacteria produce short-chain fatty acids in vitro? Dermatologica
1989; 178:121–122.
3. Sato K, Kang WH, Saga K, et al. Biology of sweat glands and their disorders. I. Normal sweat gland
function. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989; 20:537–563.
4. Anonymous. Deodorants and antitranspirants. In: Harry RG, ed. Harry’s Cosmeticology. Aylesbury:
Leonhard Hill Books, 1973:251–275.
5. Barth JH, Kealey T. Androgen metabolism by isolated human axillary apocrine glands in hidradenitis
suppurativa. J Dermatol 1991; 125:304–308.
6. Klein RW. pH and perspiration. Cosmet Toiletr 1980; 95:19–24.
7. Giovanniello R. Antiperspirants and deodorants. In: Williams DF, Schmitt WH, eds. Chemistry and
Technology of the Cosmetics and Toiletries Industry. 2nd ed. London: Blackie Academic Professional,
1996:310–343.
8. Wooding WM, Finkelstein P. A critical comparison of two procedures for antiperspirant evaluation.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1975; 26:255–275.
9. Wooding WM, Finkelstein P. Procedures for evaluation of antiperspirant efficacy. Cosmet Toiletr
1976; 91:28–32.
10. Majors PA, Wild JE. The evaluation of antiperspirant efficacy: influence of certain variables. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1974; 25:139–152.
Antiperspirants
639

=== Page 657 ===
11. Bakiewicz TA. A critical evaluation of the methods available for measurements of antiperspirants.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1973; 24:245–258.
12. Palanker AL. Substantiating the safety of antiperspirants. Cosmet Toiletr 1985; 100:43–45.
13. Murphy TD, Levine MJ. Analysis of antiperspirant efficacy test results. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1991;
42:167–197.
14. Wild JE, Bowman JP, Oddo LP, et al. Methods for claim substantiation of antiperspirants and
deodorants. Cosmet Sci Technol Ser 1998; 18:131–151.
15. Sauermann G, Hoppe U, Kligman M. The determination of the antiperspirant activity of aluminum
chlorohydrate by digital image analysis. Int J Cosmet Sci 1992; 14:32–38.
16. Beck JS, Coulson HF, Hough GL, et al. Novel technique to investigate individual eccrine sweat gland
function in vivo. 19th IFSCC Congress, Sydney, Australia, 1996; 3:95–98.
17. Quatrale RP. The mechanism of antiperspirant action. Cosmet Toiletr 1985; 100:23–26.
18. Quatrale RP, Coble DW, Stoner KL, et al. The mechanism of antiperspirant action on aluminum
salts II. Historical observations of human eccrine sweat glands inhibited by aluminum chlorohydrate.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1981; 32:107–136.
19. Quatrale RP, Coble DW, Stoner KL, et al. Mechanism of antiperspirant action on aluminum salts III.
Historical observations of human sweat glands inhibited by aluminum zirconium chlorohydrate
glycine complex. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1981; 32:195–221.
20. Laden K, Felger CB. Antiperspirants and Deodorants. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1988.
21. IFSCC Monograph No 6. Antiperspirants and Deodorants, Principles of Underarm Technology.
Weymouth: Micelle Press, 1998.
22. Cuzner B, Klepak P. Antiperspirants and deodorants. In: Butler H, ed. Poucher’s Perfumes Cosmetics
and Soaps. Vol. 3. 9th ed. London: Chapman & Hall, 1993:3–26.
23. Teagarden DL, Kozlowski JF, White JL, et al. Aluminum chlorohydrate I: structure studies. J Pharm
Sci 1981; 70:758–761.
24. Teagarden DL, Radavich JF, Hem SL. Aluminum chlorohydrate II: physicochemical properties.
J Pharm Sci 1981; 70:762–764.
25. Teagarden DL, White JL, Hem SL. Aluminum chlorohydrate III: conversion to aluminum hydroxide.
J Pharm Sci 1981; 70:808–810.
26. Woodruff J. On the scent of deodorant trends. Manuf Chem 1994; 65:34–38.
27. Alexander P. Monograph antiperspirants and deodorants. SOFW 1994; 120:117–121.
28. Klepak P. In vitro killing time studies of antiperspirant salts. SOFW 1990; 116:478–481.
29. Rosenberg A. Enhanced efficacy antiperspirant actives. Soap Perfume Cosmet 1997; 7:27–30.
30. Fondots DC. Antiperspirants, a look across the Atlantic. Cosmet Toilet Manuf Worldwide 1993;
108:181–185.
31. Hagan DB, Leng FJ, Smith PM, et al. Antiperspirant compositions based on titanium salts. Int
J Cosmet Sci 1997; 19:271–280.
32. Tranner F. Polybarrier: the future of antiperspirant technology? Soap Cosmet Chem Special 1998;
74:56–58.
33. Tranner F. Mineral salt-free topical antiperspirant compositions—comprises water insoluble,
occlusive, film-forming polymers. US patent No. 5508024.
34. Fontell K. Cubic phases in surfactant and surfactant-like lipid systems. Coll Polym Sci 1990; 268:
264–285.
35. Leng FJ, Parrot DT, inventors. Antiperspirant materials and compositions. US patent 5 593 663.
36. Abrutyn ES, Bahr BC. Formulation enhancements for underarm applications. Cosmet Toiletr 1993;
108:51–54.
37. ICI Speciality Chemicals. A new emollient for antiperspirant sticks. HAPPI 1989; October:50–51.
38. Osborae GE, Lausier JM, Lawing WD, et al. Statistical evaluation of vehicle effect on antiperspirant
activity with a limited number of subjects. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1982; 33:179–191.
39. Klepak P. Formulierungsbeispiele bei wasserhaltigen antitranspirant kompositionen. SOFW 1989;
115:415–418.
40. Abrutyn ES, Bahr BC, Fuson SM. Overview of the antiperspirant market. Technol Trends DCI 1992;
151:40–47.
41. Stephens TJ, Oresago C. Ethnic sensitive skin. Cosmet Toiletr 1994; 109:75–80.
42. IFSCC Monograph No 3. An Introduction to Rheology. Weymouth: Micelle Press, 1997.
43. Geria N. Formulation of stick antiperspirants and deodorants. Cosmet Toiletr 1984; 99:55–66.
44. Geria N. Antiperspirant sticks. Cosmet Toiletr 1996; 111:53–69.
45. Shevade M, Bianchini R, Lee R. Low residue antiperspirant solid stick composition. US patent No.
5531986.
46. Fox C. OTC products. Cosmet Toiletr 1996; 111:53–69.
47. Jungerman E. Clear antiperspirant stick technology. A review. Cosmet Toiletr 1995; 110:49–56.
48. Smith J, Madore L, Fuson S. Attacking residue in antiperspirants. DCI 1995; 12:46–51.
49. Fox C. Technically speaking. Cosmet Toiletr 1996; 111:23–26.
640
Schreiber

=== Page 658 ===
50. Hourihan JC, Krevald H, inventors. Water-in-oil emulsion antiperspirant sticks. US patent 4 704 271.
51. Fox C. Cosmetic and pharmaceutical vehicles. Cosmet Toiletr 1997; 112:31–48.
52. Anonymous. Does size matter? Soap Parf Cosmet 1998; 7:46–51.
53. Schreiber J, Klier M, Wolf F, et al. Kosmetische oder dermatologische Gele auf der Basis von
Mikroemulsionen. DE Patent 19 509 079.
54. Calagero AV. Antiperspirant and deodorant formulation. Cosmet Toiletr 1992; 107:63–69.
55. Romanowski R, Schueller R. Aerosols for apprentices. Cosmet Toiletr 1996; 111:35–40.
56. Fox C. Technically speaking. Cosmet Toiletr 1997; 112:21–25.
57. Johansen JD, Anderson TF, Kjoller M, et al. Identification of risk products for fragrance contact
allergy: a case-referent study based on patient’s histories. Am J Contact Dermat 1998; 9:80–87.
58. Motley CB. Gel stick compositions comprising optically enriched gellants. US patent 5 552 136.
Antiperspirants
641

=== Page 660 ===
63
Deodorants
Jo¨rg Schreiber
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany
INTRODUCTION
This chapter intends to give an overview on the current knowledge about the origin of
underarm odor and the biology of the underarm microflora and its interaction with
deodorizing agents. The contents of this chapter have been arranged in particular sequence
to facilitate the understanding of rational deodorant product development.
BIOLOGY OF THE UNDERARM MICROFLORA
The resident microflora of the human underarm skin consists of up to 106/cm2 organisms, e.g.,
aerobic cocci, lipophilic diphtheroids, and varying species of gram-negative bacteria (1). In the
axillae, two types of bacterial flora exist—coryneform bacteria and micrococcaceae such as
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Coryneform- or S. epidermidis-dominated populations are character-
istic for human beings. The resident microflora is a quite stable population, not varying a lot
between both axillae (2). The organisms are perfectly adapted to their ecological niche with its
higher pH value and higher moisture content compared with other skin areas (3). Hair in the
axilla, according to the literature, is not a good substrate for bacterial growth; the bacteria
prefer to reside on the underarm skin (2). Moisture is required for bacterial proliferation and is
secreted especially from the eccrine sweat glands (4). The origin of strong compared with weak
underarm odor is associated with a numerical dominance of coryneform bacteria (5).
Components of apocrine secretion, e.g., isovaleric acid and androstenone, were proposed to
contribute to axillary odor. Hydrolytic exoenzymes of skin bacteria cleave the ester bonds of
odorless water-soluble precursors of androstenol to the corresponding volatile steroid (6).
Other studies proposed that the key odorants are branched, straight chain, and unsaturated
C6-Cn fatty acids (7). (E)-3-methyl-2-hexenoic acid (E-3M2H) is the most abundant fatty acid
compared with the rest of C6-Cn fatty acids that contribute to the axillary odor bouquet.
Apocrine sweat extracts have been analyzed and concentrations of 0.5 ng/^1 for androstenone
and 357 ng/iL for E-3M2H were detected (8). Volatile odor molecules of E-3M2H found in
sweat secretions are transported according to the authors in a nonvolatile fashion to the skin
surface. Two apocrine secretion odor-binding proteins (ASOB and ASOB2) were identified,
carrying 3M2H molecules to the skin surface. Coryneform bacteria liberate the odor molecules
from the protein precursor/odorant complex (8).
The reader should be aware that occurrence of these chemical compounds does not mean
that all of us can smell them. Individual differences in odor perception for both isomers of
3M2H (9) and for the steroid androstenone are well known (8). Approximately 50% of the
adult population is not able to smell androstenones; this anosmia to androstenone—or to
3M2H—is genetically determined.
DEODORANTS
Deodorants are topically applied products designed to reduce underarm odor. They are
considered in the United States as cosmetics, while antiperspirants are treated by the FDA as
drugs. Deodorants tend to be less irritating than antiperspirants. In Europe, the consumers
today prefer deodorants compared to antiperspirants. In the United States the trend is
approximately reversed.

=== Page 661 ===
Concepts for Controlling Underarm Odor: State of the Art
The current knowledge of the biology of the underarm microflora and the origin of underarm
odor is the basis for developing strategies against odor formation. Numerous patents and
literature articles disclose the incorporation of chemical compounds for their deodorizing
properties. The intention here is to describe and exemplify major strategies, but not all
deodorant actives that were developed in the past.
Strategies to reduce underarm odor include the following:
l Antiperspirant active-containing deodorants
l Odor-masking deodorants
l Odor-neutralizing deodorants
l Odor-quenching deodorants
l Enterase inhibitors
l Antimicrobial active-containing deodorants
Antiperspirant Active-Containing Deodorants
Antiperspirant actives such as aluminum chlorohydrate or the Al–Zr complexes (see chap. 62)
reduce the secretion of eccrine sweat. Their excellent antimicrobial properties against
S. epidermidis and coryneform bacteria have been published (10). The acidity of the aluminum
salts may be a major factor in bacterial growth inhibition.
Odor-Masking Deodorants
Fragrance compositions (such as perfumes) have been used to mask odors since ancient times.
It is conventional to incorporate 0.2% to 1.5% of a perfume in body deodorants (11). They are
designed to blend with the underarm odor and thus act as a masking agent. The perception of
a perfume may differ significantly between individuals because of different interactions with
the skin, washing habits, and specific underarm odor. The fragrance materials are blended to
achieve what is known as “top note,” “middle note,” and “bottom note” components. The first
is the refreshing note upon application while the last are the olfactoric components, which stay
on after application to the underarm skin.
Perfumes with antimicrobial properties have been described in patents and in the
literature (12–14). An additional benefit, especially for emulsion-based products, is that they
might also act as a preservative. The increasing rate of contact allergies against fragrance
ingredients should be taken into account using this approach to combat underarm odor (15).
Odor-Neutralizing Deodorants
In chapter 62, it was mentioned that odorous C6-Cn fatty acids contribute to underarm odor.
Chemical neutralization with sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3) yields the corresponding
odorless soaps (16). This active, however, is not stable for a long time in aqueous compositions.
Patents for deodorant applications and usage of NaHCO3, in the presence of antiperspirant
actives, have been filed (17,18). Zinc carbonate–containing deodorants are also content of a
patent (19).
Odor-Quenching Deodorants
Zinc Ricinoleate
Zinc salts of ricinoleic acid have no bacteriostatic or antiperspirant effect (20). They strongly bind
odorous fatty acids, amines, and mercaptanes. Ligand-exchange reactions of ricinoleic acid for
odor molecules are probably the reason for the quenching properties of zinc ricinoleate (21).
Interactions with perfume components in a deodorant formulation may weaken the desired
quenching effect of the odor molecules after topical application to the underarm.
Metal Oxides
The oxides of calcium, magnesium, and zinc form in the presence of fatty acids in the
corresponding metal soaps (22). Zinc oxide particles aggregate to form a massive lump. This
leads to clogging of aerosol products (23). Hybrid powders were developed in which the metal
oxide covers the surface of a spherical nylon powder (23). The advantage of this technology is
644
Schreiber

=== Page 662 ===
the increased surface area of zinc oxide and thus enhanced odor-quenching efficacy and the
reduced particle aggregation in aerosols.
Esterase Inhibitors
Zinc Glycinate
The inhibition of exoenzymes from the underarm bacteria should also result in odor reduction.
Zinc glycinate has been described as a suitable active (24). Antimicrobial tests showed no
inhibitory effect against S. epidermidis or against the lipophilic diphtheroid bacteria supporting
the suggested mechanism against microbial exoenzymes.
Triethylcitrate
The optimal pH value for development of underarm odor caused by coryneform bacteria is
approximately about pH 6 in axillary extracts (25). Shifting the skin surface pH to the acidic
side should decrease the activity of skin esterases, which are proposed to be responsible for
degradation of underarm secretions. Triethylcitrate was proposed to form citric acid by an
enzymatic process on the underarm skin. In 1991, it was shown that this active has no pH-
reducing effect after application to the underarm skin (26). Nevertheless, deodorants
containing this active are still in the market.
Antimicrobial Active-Containing Deodorants
This approach is currently the most commonly used strategy to prevent underarm odor.
Ethanol is probably one of the best-known actives for deodorization (27). Additional efficacy is
normally required for a long-term deodorization, and this can be achieved by the additional
usage of fragrance, an antiperspirant active, or other antimicrobial actives (famesol,
phenoxyethanol, etc.).
Triclosan (2,4,40-Trichloro-20-Hydroxydiphenylether)
This active has a broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity against most gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria, molds, and yeasts. The presence of triclosan in antiperspirant sticks and roll-
ons leads to a higher reduction of the bacterial microflora versus the triclosan-free
antiperspirant composition (28). Triclosan is also used in skin care products, hand
disinfectants, and household products (29).
Glyceryl Fatty Acid Ester
Mono- and oligoglyceryl fatty acid esters such as glyceryl monocaprylate, monocaprinate,
monolaurate, and diglyceryl monocaprinate are effective deodorizers (30). Combinations of
glyceryl monolaurate with farnesol and phenoxyethanol showed synergistic efficacy effects
against coryneform bacteria (31). The advantage of this ingredient combination over the first
generation deodorant actives such as triclosan is attributed to their higher biodegradability
and their selective bacterial action. These actives are all naturally occurring in plants and
animal species. In addition, it could be demonstrated that combinations of mono- and
oligoglyceryl fatty acid esters with a variety of natural antimicrobials (e.g., wool wax acids)
displayed a synergistic antimicrobial efficacy against underarm bacteria and serve as highly
effective deodorant actives (32–35). Products containing such actives have been successfully
marketed for a number of years.
Sucrose Fatty Acid Ester
The fatty acid esters of sucrose are well known as emulsifiers in food products (36). Sucrose
can be substituted on eight hydroxyl groups with fatty acids. The antimicrobial potential
depends strongly on the substitution degree of the sucrose. Sucrose monostearate and sucrose
monolaurate have been described as deodorizers in the literature and in patents (37–39).
Glycerolether
2-Ethylhexyl glycerolether (octoxyglycerol) is a clear liquid with good solubility in cosmetic
oils, polyols, and alcohol but only moderate solubility in water (0.2%). Synergistic
Deodorants
645

=== Page 663 ===
antimicrobial activity with other ingredients has been described (40). This active has become
popular recently in European deodorant formulations.
New Concepts for Controlling Underarm Odor
Ongoing research activities focusing on a better understanding of the interaction between
underarm skin/skin microflora and skin microflora/odor formation, in combination with the
discovery of highly selective actives, today allow more specific designs for deodorant
products. In the next sections, some of the new trends are discussed in detail. New concepts for
controlling underarm odor include the following:
l Chitosan
l Bacterial enzyme inhibitors
l Odor-inhibiting precursor mimics
l Product and skin-mediated perfume transformations
l Antiadhesives
Chitosan
Chitin is a naturally occurring polysaccharide (e.g., in insects, lobster, crabs, or fungi)
containing N-acetylated D-glucosamine units. Deacetylation of the amino group leads to the
slightly water-soluble chitosan. The deodorizing properties of chitosan and the combination of
this active with aluminum salts have been the subject of a patent (41).
Bacterial Enzyme Inhibitors
The enzyme amino acid (3-lyase) is, according to a patent filed in 1990, a catalyst for the
formation of underarm odor (42). This enzyme is located in odor-releasing bacterial cells and
cleaves the apocrine precursors of sweat components, such as amino acids with the structure
unit COOH–CH–(NH2)–CH2–S–R, to the corresponding odorous sulfur products. Several
classes of enzyme inhibitors such as derivatives of hydroxylamines, 3-substituted amino acids,
cycloserine, and pyridoxal were identified.
Odor-Inhibiting Precursor Mimics
Another approach to the inhibition of the above-mentioned enzyme f-lyase is to provide an
alternative substrate for the bacteria that cleave the structure unit CH(NH2) CH2–O–C(O)–R
instead of the sulfur-containing amino acid sequence (43). This approach leads to the
corresponding nonodorous ingredients, such as benzoic acid, or to pleasant odor-generating
substances, such as phenylacetic acid.
Product- and Skin-Mediated Perfume Transformations
The physical and chemical interaction of a perfume with the underarm skin is a very
complicated matter. Research activities in this area focused on the question, which components
of a perfume stay on and above the skin after topical application (44). Headspace analysis is
one of the techniques to gain more information concerning skin/perfume interactions. It could
be demonstrated that the long lastingness of a fragrance can be achieved by using a prodrug
(ester, acetale) of a perfume ingredient (45). The esters or acetales of a fragrance composition
hydrolyze on human skin because of the slightly acid pH value. The hydrolysis products
(acids, alcohols, and aldehydes) impart a pleasant smell to the underarm skin. These product-
and skin-mediated perfume transformations are especially suitable for alkaline formulations
such as soap-based deodorant sticks. The advantage of the perfume precursor approach is
attributed to a prolonged fragrance impression of a deodorant after topical application to the
underarm skin.
Antiadhesives
An alternative concept to reduce the amount of skin bacteria in the underarm skin is the
antiadhesion approach. The understanding of the adhesion mechanisms of the resident
underarm microflora to the skin surface is the basis for developing strategies against bacterial
646
Schreiber

=== Page 664 ===
adhesion. Numerous skin microorganisms adhere preferentially to specific sites on various
body surfaces. For example, Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa adhere to
collected nasal epithelial cells (46). Corynebacterium xerosis binds to epidermal cells whereas
yeasts species such as Candida albicans bind to corneocytes. Structures of the skin specifically
involved in adherence to the underarm bacteria are thought to be proteins, oligosaccharide
structures, lipids, and hydrophobic surfaces. Imitation of these adhesion motifs by saccharides,
oligosaccharides, polysaccharides, and glycoproteins allows one to inhibit the bacterial
adherence to the skin. Additionally, it was discovered recently that among others, sucrose
esters such as sucrose myristate and sucrose laurate have antiadhesive properties to various
microorganisms including the typical microflora of the underarm skin (47).
DRUG-DELIVERY SYSTEMS AND APPLICATION
FORMS FOR DEODORANT ACTIVES
Products designed to reduce underarm odor can be formulated in a variety of delivery systems
such as suspensions, water or hydroalcoholic solutions, and emulsions. Typical application
forms are sticks, roll-ons, creams, pump sprays, aerosols, and gels. Sticks, roll-ons, and
aerosols are discussed in detail in the chapter “Antiperspirants. Lowering the amount of an
antiperspirant active, such as aluminum chlorohydrate, in an antiperspirant is one option to
formulate a deodorant. In this case, the antiperspirant active has only deodorizing properties
and nearly no impact on the eccrine sweat glands. Deodorants can be formulated in acidic,
neutral, or alkaline environment. Designing a deodorant, the formulator should have in mind
the following points:
l Long-term deodorization
l No irritation potential
l Good solubility of the active in the delivery system
l Selection of a stable fragrance
l Viscosity control of the product
l Good skin feeling of the product
Protocols for the in vitro and in vivo evaluation of deodorants have been designed. The
reader is referred to the literature (48). A new method for in vivo evaluation of antimicrobial
agents was recently developed, where the underarm bacteria were translocated to the forearm
allowing the simultaneous evaluation of multiple deodorizers in an individual (49).
Deodorant Sticks
Deodorant sticks are solidified by 6% to 8% of sodium stearate. The deodorizing agent and a
fragrance are dissolved in a hydrophilic carrier. Two stick categories can be differentiated, the
ethanol-based and the propylene glycol-based sticks (50).
Transparency is usually achieved by usage of a high polyol content. Clarifying agents for
sticks such as PPG-14 butylether, Cocamide DEA, Lauramide DEA, Steareth-100 have been
patented (51,52). Ethanol-based sticks are preferred if it is the intent of the formulator to create
a cooling sensation for the consumer. Shrinkage of the stick has to be taken into account
because of evaporation of the alcohol. Propylene glycol-based sticks tend to be more resistant
to shrinkage, and solubilization of a fragrance is easier in some instances (53) (Table 1).
Table 1
Deodorant stick
Wt%
Deodorant stick
Wt%
Water
16.0
Water
3.0
Ethanol
75.5
Propylene glycol
10.0
Deodorizer
1.0
Deodorizer
1.0
Sodium stearate
6.5
Sodium stearate
8.0
Fragrance
1.0
PPG-3 myristyl ether
77.0
Fragrance
1.0
Deodorants
647

=== Page 665 ===
Deodorant Aerosols
Spray products containing a solution of an antimicrobial active in an ethanol and/or propylene
glycol carrier, blended with a liquefied propellant, are typical for deodorant aerosols. The
difference from an antiperspirant active containing aerosol is that the deodorizer is solubilized
in an alcohol- or polyol-based formulation and not suspended. Deodorant sprays provide a
dry skin feeling to the underarm skin because they are anhydrously formulated.
Typically, 20% to 60% of the sprayable contents of an aerosol reach the skin, because the
liquefied hydrocarbon propellant vaporizes as it is sprayed (54). Propane, butane, and
isobutane are the most commonly used propellants. They condense to form a clear, colorless,
and odorless liquid with densities of 0.51 to 0.58 g/mL at 208C (55). These propellants are
inflammable in the presence of air or oxygen. Labeling of cosmetic aerosols concerning
flammability risks of volatile organic compounds and volatile solvent abuse is discussed in
detail in a recently published review (56). Aerosol containers can be fabricated from tin-
coated steel, tin-free steel (chromium-coated steel), or aluminum. Numerous types of
aerosol can cause corrosion, and testing for it was recently discussed in the literature (57).
The environmental issues of aerosols are explained in greater detail in the chapter
“Antiperspirants” (Table 2).
The formulator of an aerosol has to optimize the following parameters to get a dry
deodorant product:
l Spray rate
l Spray shape
l Particle size, concentrate/propellant ratio
l Fragrance/deodorizer concentration
l Pressure of the aerosol can
Deodorant Pump Sprays
Hydroalcoholic Pump Sprays
An alternative to aerosols is pump sprays. This category is quite popular in Europe, whereas it
is of lower interest for the consumers in the United States, because they tend to prefer a dry
application form, like the anhydrous sticks. Pump sprays allow a good dosage of the
formulation to be delivered to the underarm skin in a hygienic way. They consist of low-
viscosity hydroalcoholic solutions of a deodorizer and a perfume. Usually a solubilizer, such as
PEG-40 hydrogenated castor oil, is incorporated into the formulation to maintain a clear and
homogeneous solution (Table 3).
Table 2
Deodorant aerosol
Wt%
Alcohol
42.0
Laureth-4
0.5
Deodorizer
1.0
Fragrance
0.5
Isobutane
47.6
Propane
8.4
Table 3
Pump spray
Wt%
Water
35.6
Alcohol
60.0
PEG-40 hyd.
2.0
Castor oil
–
Deodorizer
2.0
Fragrance
0.4
648
Schreiber

=== Page 666 ===
PIT-Emulsion Pump Sprays
A disadvantage of hydroalcoholic pump sprays is the alcohol content in the formulation that
may contribute to unwanted side reactions especially in the shaved axilla. Beiersdorf AG in
Hamburg, Germany, introduced to the European market under the brand name “Nivea1” a
new pump spray on the basis of an emulsion in 1995. The sprayable low-viscous deodorant is
based on the phase inversion temperature (PIT) technology. Suitable mixtures of ethoxylated
surfactants, oils, and water in the presence of antiperspirant and deodorizing actives are
heated to 608C to 908C. Cooling the resulting W/O emulsion to room temperature yields, via a
PIT process, a finely dispersed bluish-white O/W emulsion (58–60). The droplet size
distribution of such PIT emulsions ranges from 80 to 250 nm. The above-mentioned pump
spray contained a skin-friendly deodorizing combination of glyceryl monocaprinate and wool
wax acids in an alcohol-free delivery system (Table 4).
Microemulsion Pump Sprays
Hydroalcoholic pump sprays are usually transparent, whereas sprayable PIT emulsions are
white or bluish-white products. Sprayable alcohol-free and additionally transparent pump
sprays were recently introduced into the European market (e.g., Basis pH; Beiersdorf AG,
Hamburg, Germany). Transparency of an emulsion is achieved when the size of the droplets is
below 100 nm. This O/W microemulsion can be obtained with and without the PIT technology
but needs careful selection of ingredients and considerable fine-tuning (61). The main
advantage compared with classical microemulsions is the low surfactant concentration
(<10%). Furthermore, it could be demonstrated that, in the presence of hydrophobically
modified water-soluble polymers, the above-mentioned technology allows the formulation of
gels, sprayable gels, roll-ons, sticks, and aerosol products (62).
FUTURE TRENDS
The deodorant market has undergone some remarkable changes concerning the principles to
reduce underarm odor in the last years. It is expected that the search for effective, skin-friendly
actives with a highly selective action against the cutaneous underarm microflora will lead to
long-lasting and safe deodorants. Improvements in understanding how microorganisms
adhere to human skin should facilitate the development of new strategies to reduce underarm
odor. Improvements of aerosols with no/low impact to the environment or aerosol
alternatives, such as sprayable emulsions, are probably in a few years in the portfolio of
every deodorant-selling company.
REFERENCES
1. Korting HC, Lukacs A, Braun-Falco O. Mikrobielle Flora und Geruch der gesunden menschlichen
Haut. Hautarzt 1988; 39:564–568.
2. Leyden JJ, Me Ginley KJ, Holzle E, et al. The microbiology of human axilla and its relationship to
axillary odor. J Invest Dermatol 1981; 77:413–416.
3. Lukacs A, Korting HC, Lemke O, et al. The influence of pH value on the growth of Brevibacterium
epidermidis continuous culture. Acta Derm Venerol 1995; 75:280–282.
Table 4
PIT-emulsion pump spray
Wt%
Glyceryl stearate, ceteareth-20, ceteareth-10, cetearyl alcohol,
cetyl palmitate (Emulgade SE)
4.5
Ceteareth-20
1.0
Dioctyl cyclohexane
5.0
Dicaprylylether
5.0
Deodorizer
2.0
Aluminum chlorohydrate
5.0
Water
77.5
Source: From Ref. 60.
Deodorants
649

=== Page 667 ===
4. Leyden JJ, Me Ginley KJ, Nordstrom KM, et al. Skin microflora. J Invest Dermatol 1987; 88:65s–72s.
5. Rennie PJ, Gower DB, Holland KT. In vitro and in vivo studies of human axillary odor and the
cutaneous microflora. Br J Dermatol 1991; 124:596–602.
6. Froebe C, Simone A, Charig A, et al. Axillary malodor production: a new mechanism. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1990; 41:173–185.
7. Zeng XN, Leyden JJ, Lawley HJ, et al. Analysis of characteristic odors from human axillae. J Chem
Ecol 1991; 17:1469–1491.
8. Spielman AI, Zeng XN, Leyden JJ, et al. Proteinaceous precursors of human axillary odor: isolation of
two novel odor binding proteins. Experientia 1995; 51:40–47.
9. Wysocki CJ, Zang XN, Preti G. Specifica anosmia and olfactory sensitivity to 3-methyl-2-hexenoic
acid: a major component of human axillary odor. Chem Senses 1993; 18:652.
10. Klepak P. In vitro killing time studies of antiperspirant salts. SOFW 1990; 116:478–481.
11. Geria N. Fragrancing antiperspirants and deodorants. Cosmet Toilet 1990; 105:41–45.
12. Eggensberger H. Duftstoffe und Aromen als multifunktionelle Additive. SOFW 1996; 122:789–793.
13. Diehl KH, Oltmanns P, Ramsbotham J. Parfiiminhaltsstoffe-eine alternative fur die konser-vierung
von kosmetischen Produkten? SOFW 1992; 118:546–550.
14. Morris JA, Khettry J, Seitz EW. Antimicrobial activity of aroma chemicals and essential oils. J Am Oil
Chem Soc 1979; 96:595–603.
15. Rastogi SC, Johansen JD, Frosch P, et al. Deodorants on the European market: quantitative chemical
analysis of 21 fragrances. Contact Dermatol 1998; 38:29–35.
16. Lamp JH. Sodium bicarbonate: an excellent deodorant. J Invest Dermatol 1946; 7:131–133.
17. Berschied JR. Antiperspirant-deodorant cosmetic stick products containing active agent particles in
organic matrix, which matched densities for homogeneous products. Patent No. WO 9413256.
18. Winston AE. Microporous alkali metal carbonate powder—comprises particles of average particle size
of 0.1 to 50 microns, surface area of 5 to 20 sq.m/f, average pore size of 10 to 500 nm and total pore
volume of 0.1 to 2 cc/g and is useful as lightweight deodorant ingredient. Patent No. WO 9424996.
19. Park AC. Propellant-free deodorant composition, for topical application—comprising sparingly
water-soluble salts or oxide (s) of zinc or magnesium, water-absorbing cellulosic polymer and volatile
silicone. Patent No. EP 471392 A.
20. Zekorn R. Deowirkstoff auf Basis Zinkricinoleat. Parf Kosmet 1996; 77:682–684.
21. Zekorn R. Zinc ricinoleate. Cosmet Toilet 1997; 112:37–40.
22. Kanda F, Yagi E, Fukuda M, et al. Quenching short chain fatty acids responsible for human body
odors. Cosmet Toilet 1993; 108:67–72.
23. Kanda F, Nakame T, Matsuoka M, et al. Efficacy of novel hybrid powders to quench body malodors.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1990; 41:197–207.
24. Charig A, Froebe C, Simone A, et al. Inhibitor of odor producing axillary bacterial exoenzymes. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1991; 42:133–145.
25. Rennie PJ, Gower DB, Holland KT, et al. The skin microflora and the formation of human axillary
odor. Int J Cosmet Sci 1990; 12:197–207.
26. Lukacs A, Korting HC, Braun-Falco O, et al. Efficacy of a deodorant and its components:
triethylcitrate and perfume. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1991; 42:159–166.
27. Baxter PM, Reed JV. The evaluation of underarm deodorants. Int J Cosmet Sci 1983; 5:85–95.
28. Cox AR. Efficacy of the antimicrobial agent triclosan in topical deodorant products. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1987; 38:223–231.
29. Nissen HP, Ochs D. Triclosan. Cosmet Toilet 1998; 113:61–64.
30. Dillenburg H, Jakobson G, Klein W, et al. Cosmetic deodorant preparations containing di- or
triglycerin esters. Patent No. EP 666732 Al/Bl.
31. Haustein UF, Herrmann J, Hoppe U, et al. Growth inhibition of coryneform bacteria by a mixture of
three natural products: farnesol, glyceryl monolaurate, and phenoxyethanol: HGQ. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1993; 44:211–220.
32. Klier M, Schneider G, Traupe B, et al. Desodorierende Wirkstoffkombinationen auf der Basis von
Wollwachssauren und Monocarbonsauren. DE 4305889.2.
33. Klier M, Rockl M, Schneider G, et al. Deodorant active substance combinations made from wool
grease acids and partial glycerides. EP 689418 Al.
34. Klier M, Rockl M, Traupe B, et al. Deodorizing combinations of agents based on a co-alkane
dicarboxylic acid and fatty acid partial glycerides. EP 729345 Al.
35. Klier M, Traupe B, Wolf F. Deodorant agent compositions containing cx, co-alcanoic diacids, and
mono-carboxylic esters of oligomer glycerols. EP 691125 Al.
36. Friberg SE, Larsson K. Food Emulsions. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1997.
37. Meyer PD, Vianen GM, Baal HCI. Sucrose fatty acid esters in deodorant formulations. Aerosol Spray
Rep 1998; 37:18–22.
38. Meyer PD, Vianen GM, Baal HCI. Saccharose-Fettsaureester in deodorants. Parf Kosmet 1997; 78:22–24.
39. Vianen GM, Watraven BW, Meyer PD. Deodorant composition. EP 0750903 Al.
650
Schreiber

=== Page 668 ===
40. Beilfuss W. A multifunctional ingredient for deodorants. SOFW 1998; 124:360–366.
41. Wachter R, Lehmann R, Panzer C. Desodorierende Zubereitungen. DE 19540296.
42. Lyon S, O’Neal C, van der Lee H, et al. Amino acid P-lyase enzyme inhibitors as deodorants.
WO 9105541.
43. Laney J. O-Acyl serines as deodorants. WO 9507069.
44. Behan JM, Macmaster AP, Perring KD, et al. Insight how skin changes perfume. Int J Cosmet Sci 1996;
18:237–246.
45. Suffis R, Barr ML, Ishida K, et al. Composition containing body activated fragrance for contacting the
skin and method of use. US 5626852.
46. Carson RG, Schilling KM, Harichian B, et al. Biospecific emulsions. US 5416075.
47. Biinger J, Schreiber J, Wolf F. Antiadhesive active principles. EP 806935 A2.
48. IFSCC Monograph No 6. Antiperspirants and Deodorants. Weymouth, MA: Micelle Press, 1998.
49. Leyden JJ, McGinley K, Foglia AN, et al. A new method for in vivo evaluation of antimicrobial agents
by translocation of complex dense populations of cutaneous bacteria. Skin Pharmacol 1996; 9:60–68.
50. Calogero AV. Antiperspirant and deodorant formulation. Cosmet Toilet 1992; 107:63–69.
51. Dawn R, Morton B. Clear cosmetic stick composition. WO 9427567.
52. Kellner DM. Clear, stable deodorant compositions—containing soap, antimicrobial agent, water,
polyhydric alcohol, pentadoxynol 200, and alcanolamide-alkoxylated alcohol mixture. US 5407668.
53. Geria N. Formulation of stick antiperspirants and deodorants. Cosmet Toilet 1984; 99:55–66.
54. Meyer G, Listro JA. Liquid deodorant compositions. WO 9301793.
55. Johnsen MA. The safety assessment of hydrocarbon aerosol propellants. Spray Technol Mark 1996:18–24.
56. Redbourn D. Cosmetic aerosol regulations: living with labeling. Soap Perf Cosmet 1998:45–48.
57. Tait WS. Aerosol container corrosion and corrosion testing: what is state of the art? Spray Technol
Mark 1997:47–56.
58. Wadle A, Forster T, von Rybinski W. Influence of the microemulsion phase structure on the phase
inversion temperature emulsification of polar oils. Colloids Surf A 1993; 76:51–57.
59. Forster T, von Rybinski W, Tesman H, et al. Calculation of optimum emulsifier mixtures for phase
inversion emulsification. Int J Cosmet Sci 1994; 16:84–92.
60. Wadle A, Ansmann A, Jackwerth B, et al. PIT-Emulgiertechnologie in der Kosmetik. Parf Kosmet
1996; 77:250–254.
61. Schreiber J, Eitrich A, Gohla S, et al. Cosmetic or pharmaceutical microemulsions. WO 9628131 A2/A3.
62. Schreiber J, Diec KH, Gers-Barlag H, et al. Cosmetic and pharmaceutical gels based on
microemulsions. WO 9628132 A2/A3.
Deodorants
651

=== Page 670 ===
64
Revulsive Products: Way of Action and
Evaluation of Their Efficacy
Peter Clarys and Andre´ O. Barel
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
Ron Clijsen
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium and
University College Thim van der Laan AG, Landquart, Switzerland
INTRODUCTION
In Webster’s dictionary, we found the following descriptions: “revulsive”—(i) to pull away
and (ii) an act or technique of turning or diverting a disease or blood from a diseased region in
one part of the body to another (as by counterirritation); “rubefacient”—substance for external
application that causes redness of the skin.
Revulsive products (i.e., rubefacients and urticants) are known for several clinical and
nonclinical applications. Clinically, they are used in the treatment of neuropathological
[diabetic neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia (PHN)] and/or muskeloskeletal disorders (e.g.,
osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, muscle soreness, and back pain). Nonclinically, they are
used in some sports as passive warming-up products and in the cosmetic industry as an
ingredient in skin products (1).
The capital active ingredient in these topical formulations is a nicotinate derivative
[methylnicotinate (MN), hexylnicotinate (HN), and benzylnicotinate (BN)] or capsaicin.
Nicotinates provoke an elevation of arachidonic acid and prostaglandin levels (prostaglandin
D2). The produced prostaglandins act on the neuroreticular tissue of the arteriovenous
anastomoses of the dermal vascular plexuses by means of an endothelium relaxant factor. The
latter provokes a relaxation of the vascular smooth muscles resulting in an augmentation of
the cutaneous circulation and a flooding of the superficial veins. This nonimmunological
immediate contact reaction is visible as an erythema (2).
Capsaicin is an alkaloid, derived from chili peppers, with analgesic properties. Capsaicin
binds to nocisensors in the skin, excitating neurons, which results in itching, pricking, or
burning with a cutaneous vasodilation (3).
Stimulation of afferent C fibers with release of substance P is hypothesized, while the
desensitization after prolonged treatment is believed to occur due to a depletion of substance P (3).
The topical application of capsaicin has equally been used to study reflex mechanisms of
dermal vasodilatation (4,5) and as an experimental pain inducer to study the underlying
nocisensoric mechanisms (6). Threshold levels of sensitization to increasing capsaicin
concentrations have been used to study sensitive facial skin (7).
Besides these clinical and practical applications, rubeficiants (especially nicotinates) are
often used in more fundamental research toward percutaneous penetration processes. The
quantification of the physiologically induced vascular response has been found to be a good
indicator for the skin bioavailability of these topically applied substances.
The response is often quantified by measuring the perfusion of the skin microcirculation
(laser Doppler velocimetry), the skin color (redness), or the skin temperature. The laser
Doppler instrument measures the increased perfusion of the arterial plexuses, while the skin
color is not only an indication for the increased flux in the arterial part of the skin
microcirculation but also for the flooding of the venous capacitance vessels.
This chapter describes the way of action and factors influencing the pharmacodynamic
response to nicotinates under different experimental conditions, followed by possible clinical
applications. For capsaicin, the emphasis will be mainly on clinical applications since this
revulsive product is not often used for fundamental research. Finally, the use of revulsive
products in physiotherapy (sport) will be discussed.

=== Page 671 ===
NICOTINATES
The onset of the nicotinate contact reaction depends on the derivative used. Application of MN
(hydrophilic) results in an immediate response as measured with the laser Doppler
instrument, while HN (lipophylic molecule) shows a lag time up to five minutes (8).
The intensity of the reaction is concentration dependent (9,10). Concentrations between
1 and 100 mM are reported. The duration of the response varies from 20 minutes up to
60 minutes for the laser Doppler response and up to 90 minutes for the color response. An
increased temperature is noticed up to 90 minutes post application (10).
The pharmacodynamic response varies in function of the anatomical skin site (11). The
strongest response was recorded at the forehead and the chest, while the response was weaker
at the abdomen, forearm, and thigh. A significant relation was found between the nicotinate
response and skin characteristics, such as TEWL, stratum corneum hydration, skin temper-
ature, baseline perfusion of the microcirculation, and sebum gland density.
In the experiments of Marrakchi and Maibach, reactivity was tested on different
regions of the face (forehead, nose, cheek, nasolabial and perioral areas, and chin), the neck,
and the volar forearm (12). Experiments were carried out on young (29.8  3.9 years) and older
(73.6  17.4 years) population. For both the age groups, the areas on the face and neck were
more sensitive to HN compared with the forearm. A different sensitivity pattern for the
face was detected between the two age groups, while peak values were significantly higher in
the older group for the forehead, cheek, and nasolabial area. The authors explained the
differences between the age groups by the photoaging effect on the sebum glands with more
and enlarged glands in the older subjects. Roskos et al. did not find an effect of age when
applying MN in young and older subjects (13).
Issachar et al. found a significant correlation between the percutaneous penetration of MN
and sensitive skin. The intensity of the response to the nicotinates differed significantly between
normal and sensitive skin, while the duration of the inflammation was comparable (14).
Racial differences in barrier function were demonstrated by quantification of the
nicotinate response with a laser Doppler instrument (15,16).
Berardesca et al. compared nicotinate responsiveness in Caucasians and black volunteers
before and after a delipidation of the challenged skin area (15).
A lower cutaneous response was noticed for the blacks compared with the whites under
both experimental conditions. Kompaore and Tsuruta compared Asians, blacks, and
Caucasians with a nicotinate challenge. The lag time between nicotinate application and
onset of the vascular response was used as an indication of barrier permeability. Permeability
was strongest in Asian skin, weaker in Caucasian skin, and weakest in black skin (16).
The response to nicotinates is significantly reduced after oral treatment with anti-
inflammatory drugs (17,18) and with topically applied anti-inflammatory drugs (19–23). The
reduced response in the presence of topically applied anti-inflammatory drugs was used as a
model to study iontophoresis (24). In these experiments, the reduction in the MN response was
used as an indicator for the presence of diclofenac in the stratum corneum.
In their experiments with penetration enhancers Tanojo et al. found a reduced lag time in
the HN response after pretreatment of the skin with propylene glycol. The combination of
propylene glycol with oleic acid was not more effective than propylene glycol alone (25).
The microvascular sensitivity (tested with increasing nicotinate concentrations) was
increased in diabetic patients compared with controls, while the maximal microvascular
responses were comparable (2). Similar findings were observed by Caselli et al. in healthy
control subjects and diabetic neuropathy patients (1). These authors propose the addition of
MN in the moistening products used to reduce the development of diabetic foot (1,2).
A reduced response was noticed in patients with Huntington’s disease (26).
CAPSAICIN
Capsaicin (trans-8-methyl-N-vanillyl-nonenamide) is an alkaloid derived from the common
hot pepper plant of the nightshade (solanacae) family. Capsaicin represents the main
constituent of the total pungent acid amides present in the capsicum species and is responsible
for the red-hot chili taste (27).
654
Clarys et al.

=== Page 672 ===
Besides being considered as food additive, capsaicin has also gained human exposure as
oral supplement or topical analgesic (28).
Capsaicin is a selective agonist for the transient receptor potential (TRP) channel. The
TRPV1 receptor is a ligand-gated, nonselective cation channel expressed on a subpopulation of
primary small-diameter sensory Ad fibers and C fibers, responsive to noxious heat and
mechanical and chemical stimuli (29,30). The topical application of capsaicin on the human
skin excitates the TRPV1-expressing nocisensors, resulting in an itching, pricking, burning
sensation with a cutaneous vasodilation, hyperalgesia, and allodynia (30). Stimulation of
afferent C fibers with release of neuropeptides, predominantly substance P is hypothesized,
while the desensitization after prolonged treatment is believed to occur because of a depletion
of substance P (31). Capsaicin inhibits axonal transport of neurotransmitters by depressing the
release of the nerve growth factor (NGF) (32).
The resulting hypoalgesia is due to degeneration of epidermal nerve fibers (31–34). The
desensitization of hyperactive nociceptive sensory axons is the basis for therapeutic topical
application or intra-articular injections of capsaicin (35).
Peripheral neuropathy, provoked by axonal degeneration of sensory autonomic and
motor neurons of the peripheral nervous system, is a common complication of diabetes and
chronic alcohol abuse. The manifestations of peripheral neuropathy classically progress from
the most distal extremities. Positive symptoms are lancinating pain, paresthesia, numbness,
allodynia, and burning and itching sensations (36).
The Capsaicin Study Group (1991) conducted a multicenter, double-blind, vehicle-
controlled study to establish the efficacy of topical 0.075% capsaicin cream in relieving the pain
associated with diabetic neuropathy. Patients (n ¼ 252) were randomly assigned to the
capsaicin or placebo group. Capsaicin cream or vehicle was applied on the painful areas four
times a day for eight weeks. Statistical analysis showed significant difference in favor of
capsaicin compared with placebo for the following parameters: pain relief, decreasing pain
relief, and pain improvement on the physician’s global evaluation scale. The authors asserted
that topical capsaicin cream is safe and effective in treating painful diabetic neuropathy (37).
These findings corroborate the results of the placebo-controlled studies by Scheffler et al.
(38) and Tandan et al. (39). They demonstrated the superiority of capsaicin cream 0.075%
versus placebo in pain control and improvement of daily activity during the treatment of
diabetic neuropathy.
A meta-analysis of four randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials using
capsaicin in the treatment of diabetic neuropathy found capsaicin to be more effective than
placebo (40). This is in contrast with the findings of Low et al. (41). In their study, using a four
times daily application of capsaicin cream versus a nicotinate formulation as placebo, they
failed to demonstrate significant improvement in chronic distal painful polyneuropathy after
12 weeks of treatment. Besides using different pain evaluation scales, physiological functions
such as sudomotor axon reflex, nerve conductance, and sensory examinations were carried out
before, during, and after the experiment (41).
PHN is the most common complication of Herpes Zoster. The incidence of Herpes Zoster
and its associated complications mainly occur in older patients (42). The pain associated with
PHN is often referred to as neurogenic pain and generated as a result of neural dysfunction
and therefore unresponsive to conventional analgesics including opiates (43).
The hypothesized mechanism for capsaicin-induced analgesia in PHN is the interference
with the biosynthesis of the neuropetide substance P, which has an important role in the
central transmission of nociceptive signals (44).
Two published double-blind, placebo-controlled studies evaluated the clinical effective-
ness of topical capsaicin cream in the treatment of PHN. The reported results of both the
studies were in favor of capsaicin (0.075%) cream versus placebo. McCleane demonstrated that
the mixed application of glyceryl trinitrate and capsaicin cream was significantly more
effective than placebo in reducing pain. This combination had a positive effect on the
tolerability of treatment with capsaicin cream in patients with osteoarthritis (44).
Painfull cutaneous disorders such as psoriasis, nostalgia paresthetica, and atopic
dermatitis are characterized by intense itching, scaling, and erythema (45,46). Nonhistaminic
itching, in contrast to histaminic itching, is difficult to treat, and therapeutic applications are
often uneffective (47). The release of substance P increases the vascular permeability and the
number of mast cells in the skin (48). The responsiveness of several forms of urticaria to
Revulsive Products
655

=== Page 673 ===
capsaicin treatment may be related to the effects of capsaicin on the microvasculature of the
skin (47). The topical application of capsaicin seems to be effective in the treatment of a variety
of painful clinical conditions affecting the skin (40,47,49). However, the absence of a “burning
placebo” as a control vehicle makes it difficult to conduct double-blind studies, and further
research is needed to assess the clinical effectiveness of capsaicin.
Detection threshold determined by applying increasing concentrations of capsaicin on
facial skin was used as an objective parameter for sensitive skin (7). Using that procedure
Jourdain et al. detected subjects with low and high threshold. This threshold level corresponded
with the self-declared level of sensitive skin. The authors concluded that this skin neuro-
sensitivity test appears to be a promising tool for cosmetic diagnosis of sensitive skin (7).
However, the use of capsaicin, in some cases, is accompanied with adverse effects. Initial
exacerbation of symptoms, transient burning, and redness at application site is reported by
patients in various capsaicin studies. Because of the need for frequent application in the
treatment procedure, these side effects may be the major reason for the poor compliance (50,51).
PHYSIOTHERAPY AND SPORT
Although revulsive products are widely used in the physiotherapy practice, few studies report
on the efficacy of these products (10).
In physiotherapy, revulsive products are mainly used for the relief of joint and muscle
pain. In sports, these products are often used as passive warming-up for activities in cold
environments. As active ingredients, the formulations contain analgesic substances, such as
salicylates, camphor, menthol, oil of turpentine, and MN or HN as vasodilatory substances
(10). Their effect is mainly because of vasodilatory components provoking a thermal effect in
the superficial layers of the skin. Analgesic components (e.g., salicylates) may be added in the
formulations, but the target tissue of these analgesic substances is not the skin but the
underlying muscle, tendon, or joint tissue. Evaluation of the efficacy of regional therapy is
beyond the scope of this chapter.
Our literature search did not find reports on the efficacy of revulsive products as used in
physiotherapy. We evaluated the effects of three commercially available topical products
commonly used in physiotherapy practice.
The thermal effect of these products was evaluated by means of noninvasive
measurements of biophysical skin properties. Product 1 was a W/O (Water/Oil) emulsion
containing MN at 1.5% and methylglycolisate at 5.0% as active ingredients. Product 2 was an
O/W (Oil/Water) emulsion containing MN (1.0%) and a-bisabolol as active ingredients. a-
Bisabolol is the active component of camomile and has an anti-irritant effect. Product 3 was a
spray containing methylsalicilate (2.0%), menthol (3.0%), and oil of turpentine (5.0%).
Figure 1
Perfusion of the skin
microcirculation in function of time
as measured after topical applica-
tion of product 1 (—&—) product 2
(............); product 3 (- - -o- - -). An
untreated
control
is
included
(- - -~- - -). Mean  s.d. (n ¼ 15).
656
Clarys et al.

=== Page 674 ===
It was found that products containing nicotinates provoked a significant increase in the
perfusion of skin microcirculation, a significant increase of the superficial skin temperature,
and a significant reddening of the skin color (erythema) (see Fig. 1–3). The maximum increase
obtained in skin temperature (28C) is believed to have little effect on the underlying tissues.
However, the strong sensation in the skin can “pull away” the pain sensation from other
tissues.
Comparison of the three measurement techniques gives information concerning the
underlying mechanism of erythema production: the arterial vasodilatation causes an increased
blood flow (reaching its maximum 10 minutes post application), resulting in an increased
amount of blood in the superficial capacitance vessels. This results in reddening of the skin
(maximum redness 15 minutes post application), and heat is lost by convection (reaching a
maximum 15 minutes post application).
We assume that the effect of single application of revulsive products is mainly due to the
thermal effect, which is easily quantifiable. The strong sensations in the dermal and epidermal
skin layers will relieve the feeling of pain in other tissues or structures. The thermal effect
is equally limited, since a maximal increase in skin temperature of  28C was obtained
Figure 2
Skin color a* parameter
in function of time as measured
after topical application of product 1
(—&—) product 2 (............); prod-
uct 3 (- - -o- - -). An untreated control
is included (- - -~- - -). Mean  s.d. (n
¼ 15).
Figure 3
Skin temperature in func-
tion of time as measured after topical
application of product 1 (—&—)
product 2 (............); product 3
(- - -o- - -). An untreated control is
included (- - -~- - -). Mean  s.d.
(n ¼ 15).
Revulsive Products
657

=== Page 675 ===
by nicotinate application. The heat transfer toward muscles and other structures is limited
because of the hypodermal layers, containing mainly adipose tissue, which work as very good
isolators (52,53). Moreover, deeper tissues have a temperature closer to the core temperature of
378C. In our experiments, skin temperature reached about 338C, which is lower than the
temperature of deeper structures! This finding points equally to the inefficiency of these
revulsive products, as passive warming-up is often used for sport activities in colder
environments. On the contrary, the use of such products will provoke a greater transfer of heat
toward the cold environment with a possible negative effect on the thermoregulation.
CONCLUSION
Revulsive products produce a reddening of the skin. This erythema is due to an increased
perfusion of the microcirculation after a vasodilation of the arterial plexus at the different skin
levels.
Nicotinates act via an endothelium relaxant factor, while capsaicin uses a neurogenic
cascade with involvement of substance P.
The more clinical applications of nicotinates aim to increase the perfusion of the
superficial microvasculature to obtain increased skin temperature and a kind of pain relief by
“pulling away” the pain sensation located in the deeper tissues (gate control). In capsaicin
treatments, desensitization is aimed by depletion of substance P at the nociceptive sensors.
This can only be obtained by long-term multiple treatment regimes (up to 4 times a day for
12 weeks).
For nicotinates, no side effects are reported, while the adherence to capsaicin treatment is
rather weak due to the inconvenience of the side effects at the site of application (burning,
itching, etc.).
Despite nicotinates being widely used in physiotherapy (sport), there is only limited
evidence for the efficiency of these treatments. Reports on capsaicin treatment indicate a
moderate positive effect under different clinical situations. However, most of the designs lack
an adequate placebo treatment. In the experiments of Low et al. using a nicotinate solution as
“burning placebo,” no difference was found between the capsaicin versus the burning placebo
in the relief of pain (41). Hence, the use of nicotinates, in different clinical treatments, needs to
be further elaborated. The absence of side effects may improve compliance.
Nicotinates are widely used in more fundamental research toward percutaneous
penetration, since the quantification of the vascular response can be used as an indicator for
the skin bioavailability. Other skin properties, such as the problem of sensitive skin can also be
studied using a nicotinate challenge. In more recent reports, a capsaicin challenge has been
developed to study the sensitive skin.
The instrumentation available nowadays allows a more precise evaluation and
quantification of physiological responses. Using these techniques under experimental and
clinical conditions may increase the knowledge and evidence in the use of revulsive products.
REFERENCES
1. Caselli A, Hanane T, Jane B, et al. Topic methyl nicotinate-induced skin vasodilatation in diabetic
neuropathy. J Diabetes Complicat 2003; 17:205–210.
2. Koivukangas V, Oikarinen A, Salmela PI, et al. Microcirculatory response of skin to benzoic acid and
methyl nicotinate in patients with diabetes. Diabet Med 2000; 17(2):130–133.
3. Mason L, Andrew Moore R, Derry S, et al. Systematic review of topical capsaicin for the treatment of
chronic pain. BMJ 2004; 328(7446):991–994.
4. La Motte RH, Shain CN, Simone DA, et al. Neurogenic hyperalgesia: psychophysical studies of
underlying mechanisms. J Neurophysiol 1991; 66:190–211.
5. La Motte RH, Lundberg LER, Torebjo¨rk H-E. Pain, hyperalgesia and activity in nociceptive C units in
humans after intradermal injection of capsaicin. J Physiol 1992; 448:749–764.
6. Serra J, Campero M, Bostock H, et al. Two types of C nociceptors in human skin and their behavior in
areas of capsaicin-induced secondary hyperalgesia. J Neurophysiol 2004; 91:2270–2781.
7. Jourdain R, Bastien P, De Lacharrie O, et al. Detection thresholds of capsaicin: a new test to assess
facial skin neurosensitivity. Int J Cosmet Sci 2005; 27:353–354.
658
Clarys et al.

=== Page 676 ===
8. Murphy TM, Hadgraft J. A physicochemical interpretation of phonophoresis in skin penetration
enhancement. Prediction of Percutaneous Penetration. Methods, Measurements and Modelling.
London: IBC Technical Services, Ltd, 1989:333–336.
9. Guy RH, Tur E, Bugatto B, et al. Pharmacodynamic measurements of methyl nicotinate percutaneous
absorption. Pharm Res 1984; 1:76–81.
10. Clarys P, Buchet E Barel AO. Evaluation of different topical vasodilatory products with non-invasive
techniques. In: Scott RC, Guy RH, Hadgraft J, Bodde´ HE, eds. Prediction of Percutaneous Penetration.
Methods, Measurements and Modelling (vol. 2). London: IBC Technical Services, LTD, 1991: 46–59.
11. Clarys P, Manou I, Barel AO. Relationship between anatomical skin site and response to halcinonide
and methyl nicotinate studied by bioengineering techniques. Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:161–168.
12. Marrakchi S, Maibach HI. Functional map and age-related differences in the human face:
nonimmunologic contact urticaria induced by hexyl nicotinate. Contact Dermatitis 2006; 55:15–19.
13. Roskos KV, Bircher AJ, Maibach HI, et al. Pharmacodynamic measurements of methyl nicotinate
percutaneous absorption: the effect of aging on microcirculation. Br J Dermatol 1990; 122:165–171.
14. Issachar N, Gall Y, Borrel MT, et al. Correlation between percutaneous penetration of methyl
nicotinate and sensitive skin, using laser Doppler imaging. Contact Dermat 1998; 39(4):182–186.
15. Berardesca E, de Rigal J, Le´veˆque JL, et al. In vivo biophysical characterization of skin physiological
differences in races. Dermatologica 1991; 182(2):89–93.
16. Kompaore F, Tsuruta. In vivo differences between Asian, black and white in the stratum corneum
barrier function. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 1993; 65(suppl 1):S223–S225.
17. Wilkin JK, Fortner G, Reinhardt LA, et al. Prostaglandins and nicotinate-provoked increase in
cutaneous blood flow. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1985; 38(3):273–277.
18. Duteil L, Queille C, Poncet M, et al. Objective assessment of topical corticosteroids and non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs in methyl-nicotinate-induced skin inflammation. Clin Exp Dermatol 1990;
15:195–199.
19. Treffel P, Gabard B. Feasibility of measuring the bioavailability of topical ibuprofen in commercial
formulations using drug content in epidermis and a methyl nicotinate skin inflammation assay. Skin
Pharmacol 1993; 6(4):268–275.
20. Treffel P, Gabard B, Bieli E. Relationship between the in-vitro diclofenac epidermal level and the in-
vivo anti-inflammatory efficacy in the methylnicotinate test. Prediction of percutaneous Penetration
Methods, Measurements, Modelling (vol. 3b). Brain KR, James VJ, Walters KA, , eds. Cardiff: STS
Publishing, 1993:520–529.
21. Poelman MC, Piot B, Guyon F. Assessment of topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1989; 41(10):720–722.
22. Poelman MC, Le´veˆque JL. Influence of the vehicle on the efficacy of anti-inflammatory drugs
measured by non-invasive methods?. In: Brain KR, James VJ, Walters KA, eds. Prediction of
Percutaneous Penetration. Methods, Measurements, Modelling (vol. 3b) Cardiff: STS Publishing,
1993:299–302.
23. Bonina FP, Puglia C, Barbuzzi T, et al. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of polyoxyethylene esters as
dermal prodrugs of ketoprofen, naproxen and diclofenac. Eur J Pharm Sci Sep 2001; 14(2):123–134.
24. Lambrechts R, Clarys P, Clijsen R, et al. Determination of the in vivo bioavailability of
ionthophoretical delivered diclofenac using a methylnicotinate skin inflammation assay. Skin Res
Technol 2005; 11:1–6.
25. Tanojo H, Boelsma E, Junginger HE, et al. In vivo human skin permeability enhancement by oleic acid:
a laser Doppler velocimetry study. J Control Release 1999; 58(1):97–104.
26. Puri BK. Impaired phospholipid-related signal transduction in advanced Huntington’s disease. Exp
Physiol 2001; 86(5):683–685.
27. Bernstein JE. Capsaicin and substance P. Clin Dermatol 1991; 9(4):497–503.
28. Chanda S, Bashir M, Babbar S, et al. In vitro hepatic and skin metabolism of capsaicin. Drug Metab
Dispos 2008 Jan 7; (Epub ahead of print)
29. Caterina MJ, Schumacher MA, Tominaga M, et al. The capsaicin receptor: a heat-activated ion channel
in the pain pathway. Nature 1981; 389:816–824.
30. Szallasi A, Blumberg PM. Specific binding of resiniferatoxin, an ultrapotent capsaicin analog, by
dorsal root ganglion membranes. Brain Res 1990; 524:106–111.
31. Nolano M, Simone DA, Wendelschafer-Crabb G, et al. Topical capsaicin in humans: parallel loss of
epidermal nerve fibers and pain sensation. Pain 1999; 81(1–2):135.
32. Fitzgerald M, Woolf CJ. Axon transport and sensory C-fibre function. In: Chahl LA, Szolcsanyi J,
Lambeck F, eds. Antidromic Vasodilatation and Neurogenic Inflammation. Budapest: Akademiai
Kiado, 1984:119–137.
33. Reilly DM, Ferdinando D, Johnston C, et al. The epidermal nerve fibre network: characterization of
nerve fibres in human skin by confocal microscopy and assessment of racial variations. Br J Dermatol
1997; 137:163–170.
Revulsive Products
659

=== Page 677 ===
34. Simone DA, Nolano M, Wendelschafer-Crabb G, et al. Intradermal injection of capsaicin in humans:
diminished pain sensation associated with rapid degeneration of intracutaneous nerve fibers. Soc
Neurosci Abstr 1996; 22:1802.
35. Bley KR. Recent developments in transient receptor potential vanilloid receptor 1 agonist based
therapies. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2004; 13:1445–1456.
36. Duby JJ, Campbell RK, Setter SM, et al. Diabetic neuropathy: an intensive review. Am J Health Syst
Pharm 2004; 61:160–173.
37. The Capsaicin Study Group. Treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy with topical capsaicin: a
multicenter, double-blind, vehicle-controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1991; 151:2225–2229.
38. Scheffler NM, Sheitel PL, Lipton MN. Treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy with capsaicin
0.075%. J Am Pediatr Med Assoc 1991; 31:288–293.
39. Tandan R, Lewis GA, Krusinski PB, et al. Topical capsaicin in painful diabetic neuropathy–controlled
study with long-term follow-up. Diab Care 1992; 15:8–14.
40. Zhang WY, Po ALW. The effectiveness of topically applied capsaicin: a meta-analysis. Euro J Clin
Pharmacol 1994; 46:517–522.
41. Low PA, Opfer-Gehrking TL, Dyck PJ, et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled study of the application
of capsaicin cream in chronic distal painful polyneuropathy. Pain 1995; 62:163–168.
42. Mounsey Al, Matthew LG, Slawson DC. Herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia: prevention and
management. Am Fam Physician 2005; 72(6):1075–1080.
43. Arner A, Meyerson B. A lack of analgesic effect of opiods on neuropathic and idiopathic forms of
pain. Pain 1988; 33:11–23.
44. McCleane G. The analgesic efficacy of topical capsaicin is enhanced by glycerlyl trinitrate in painful
osteoarthritis: a randomized, double blind, placebo controlled study. Eur J Pain 2000; 4:355–360.
45. Ellis CN, Berberian B, Sulien VI, et al. A doubleblind evaluation of topical capsaicin in pruritic
psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermato 1993; 129:438–442.
46. Leibsohn E. Treatment of notalgia paresthetica with capsaicin. Cutis 1992; 49:335–336.
47. Reimann S, Luger T, Metze D. Topical capsaicin for the treatment of itch and pain in dermatological
patients. Hautarzt Springer-Verlag 2000; 51:164–172.
48. Ebertz MJ, Hirschman CA, Kettelkamp NS, et al. Substance P-induced histamine release in human
cuteanous mast cell. J Invest Dermatol 1987; 88:682–685.
49. Hautkappe M, Roizen MF, Toledano A, et al. Review of the effectiveness of capsaicin for painful
cutaneous disorders and neural dysfunction. Clin J Pain 1998; 14(2):97–106.
50. Simons Z, Feldman EL. The pharmacological treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy. Clin Diab 2000;
18(3):116–118.
51. Head KA. Peripheral neuropathy: pathogenic mechanisms and alternative therapies. Altern Med Rev
2006; 10(4):294–329.
52. Dittmar A. Skin thermal conductivity. A reliable index of skin blood flow and skin hydration. In:
Leveque JL, ed. Cutaneous Investigation in Health and Disease. Non-invasive Methods and
Instrumentation. New York: Marcel Dekker Inc., 1989:323–358.
53. Stu¨ttgen G, Ott A, Flesch U. Measurement of skin temperature. In: Leveque JL ed. Cutaneous
Investigation in Health and Disease. Non-invasive Methods and Instrumentation. New York: Marcel
Dekker Inc., 1989:275–322.
660
Clarys et al.

=== Page 678 ===
65
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism
of Action
John C. Leffingwell
Leffingwell & Associates, Canton, Georgia, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
The use of “purified” cooling agents in pharmaceutical and cosmetic preparations only dates
back to the late 1880s with the commercial production of menthol from Japanese peppermint
(Mentha arvensis) oil in Japan (1). The cultivation of peppermint in Japan before the Christian
era appears to predate any other country, and menthol is reputed to have been used
medicinally for almost as long (2). In the Western world, it was about 1770 that the Dutch
botanist, H. David Gaubius, first isolated menthol from the oil of Mentha piperita in Utrecht
(2,3). Prior to the commercial availability of menthol, the essential oils of peppermint
varieties (primarily M. and M. arvensis) were the sole source for use as cooling minty
ingredients. It is significant that at the end of the 18th century only about 900 to 1400 kg of
peppermint oils (both piperita and arvensis) were consumed worldwide (1). By the late 1890s,
production had increased to about 175,000 kg (2). In 2007, total peppermint oil production
was estimated at more than 26,000,000 kg, with about 21,500,000 kg being the oil of
M. arvensis (commonly referred to as cornmint oil), which is used mostly for the production
of natural leavo-menthol (4).
This chapter reviews the use of menthol and new classes of cooling agents that have been
discovered since the 1970s. In addition, we briefly touch upon the efficacy of cooling agents as
insect repellents. Finally, recent findings on the physiological mechanisms of cold receptors are
presented.
COOLING INGREDIENTS
Menthol Background
Before World War II, production of leavo-menthol [hereafter referred to as (–)-menthol] was
controlled exclusively by Japan and China. In 1939, Japan exported 268,920 kg of menthol,
while China’s exports in 1940 were 190,909 kg (1). With the advent of war, shipments to the
allied countries ceased and major shortages ensued. While synthetic (–)-menthol could be
produced from high citronellal feed stocks (e.g., citronella oil and citronella-type eucalyptus
oils), this also was no longer an option. However, Japanese and Chinese immigrants in Brazil
rapidly began planting M. arvensis for menthol production. In 1941, Brazil produced 5000 kg of
menthol, rising to 1,200,000 kg by 1945 (1). By the 1960s, Brazil’s production peaked at about
3,000,000 kg, while about the same time China began supplying menthol again.
During the 1960s, an oversupply of menthol caused the price to fall to as low as $7.70 to
$8.80 per kilogram, and processors reduced production levels. This ultimately led to
worldwide shortages and a price spike as high as $50 plus per kilogram in 1974 (with similar
price spikes now occurring about every 10 years) (3). As menthol is a commodity, it is
sometimes subject to financial speculation, which exacerbates price swings.
In 1958, India began expanding plantings of M. arvensis, but, until the late 1980s, the
quality was highly variable and often had low menthol content. In the 1980s, new strains were
introduced that gave improved oil yields and had menthol contents of 75% to 85%. By 1996,
India was producing 6000 metric ton of M. arvensis oil and had long surpassed China as the
major producer of menthol (3). In 2007, it was estimated that India would produce in excess of
20,000 metric ton of this mint oil. While the bulk of current production is used for local
menthol crystallization, significant amounts of oil and crude menthol fractions are exported to
Brazil, Taiwan, and Japan for further purification. The residual oil left after crystallizing

=== Page 679 ===
menthol still contains 35% to 45% menthol as well as menthones and other typical mint
components. Much of this oil (commonly referred to as dementholized cornmint oil) is
rectified by distillation and sold for use where normal peppermint oil (ex M. piperita) is used
(toothpaste, mouthwash, etc.). In addition, some of this dementholized oil is fractionated to
isolate the menthones (which can be converted by reduction into (–)-menthol) and other
“natural” flavor chemicals.
During the 1970s and 1980s, a number of new routes to synthetic (–)-menthol were
developed, only two of which led to long-term commercial success. These processes have been
reviewed by both Leffingwell (5) and Hopp and Lawrence (6). Today, the procedure
developed by Haarmann and Reimer (now Symrise) on the basis of hydrogenation of thymol
to racemic dl-menthol followed by selective crystallization of (–)-menthol (via the benzoate
ester) is the major process (7).
The Takasago process uses myrcene as the raw material, which is converted to N,N-
diethylgeranylamine and then asymmetrically isomerized via the chiral rhodium (S)-BINAP
(or SEGPHOS) complex to the optically active enamine of citronellal. Hydrolysis yields (+)-
citronellal, which is cyclized to (–)-isopulegol by classical methods. On hydrogenation, the
isopulegol gives (–)-menthol in high optical purity (8,9). An alternative starting material
(instead of myrcene) is isoprene, which can be dimerized to N,N-diethylnerylamine. This
material can be converted to (–)-menthol in a manner analogous to the myrcene route using
rhodium (R)-BINAP as the chiral catalyst (10). Reflecting on the Takasago process, Ryoji
Noyori stated in his 2001 Nobel lecture, “This resulted from a fruitful academic/industrial
collaboration. . . .” (11).
Clark estimates that 2007 worldwide consumption of menthol from all sources (i.e.,
peppermint oils, natural menthol, and synthetic menthol) is 32,000 metric ton, of which 19,170
metric ton is purified menthol (4).
Table 1 provides our estimate of production in producing countries (or in the case of
Symrise and Takasago, company production of synthetic (–)-menthol).
Table 2 provides the 2007 estimated worldwide usage of menthol by consumer product
category—on the basis of Clark’s data by region (4).
Table 1
Worldwide Sources of Menthol (2007)
Source
Metric ton
India (natural)
9,700
China (natural)
2,120
Symrise (synthetic)
3,600
Takasago (synthetic)
1,500
Other synthetica
1,200
Brazil (natural)b
450
Taiwan (natural)b
300
Japan (natural)b
300
Totalc
19,170
aOther synthetic includes menthol produced from menthone as well as racemic menthol.
bPrimarily from Mentha arvensis oil or crude menthol ex India (or China).
cTotal menthol volume based on Clark’s estimate (4).
Table 2
2007 Estimated Worldwide Consumption of Menthol % by Product Category
Product category
Menthol %
Oral hygiene
28.00
Pharmaceuticals
26.60
Tobacco
25.30
Confectionaries
11.00
Shaving products
7.00
Miscellaneous
2.10
Source: From Ref. 4.
662
Leffingwell

=== Page 680 ===
Menthol Chemistry
Menthol is a C10H20O terpenoid alcohol (MW 156.27) with three chiral centers leading to eight
possible stereoisomers (4 enantiomeric pairs). The characterization of the stereoisomeric
menthols was painstakingly resolved prior to the availability of modern methods by Read
(12,13). The structures of the eight enantiomers, with their optical rotations (in ethanol), are
shown in Figure 1.
Only the (–)-menthol enantiomer possesses the clean desirable minty odor and intense
cooling properties. For example, the (+)-menthol enantiomer is less cooling and possesses a
musty off-note odor that is undesirable in most applications. This musty note is also present in
racemic menthol (15). The organoleptics and cooling strengths of all of the enantiomers have
been reviewed (5,6). Figure 2 provides the cooling thresholds in ppm.
Figure
1
Stereoisomers
of
menthol. Source: From Ref. 14.
Figure 2
Cooling thresholds (in ppm) (by taste dilution). Source: From Ref. 14.
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action
663

=== Page 681 ===
Natural menthol ex M. arvensis oil is normally about 99.0% to 99.6% pure, with the
remaining impurities being other constituents found in the cornmint oil. While, in most cases,
the mint oil impurities contribute a pleasant peppermint aroma, certain impurities, such as
mint sulfide, can also impart less desirable and harsh notes. Thus, odor discrepancies often
arise when comparing samples from different companies or countries. To overcome such
differences, the skilled technician can add a small percentage (e.g., 0.2–0.4%) of terpeneless
peppermint oil ex M. piperita (or redistilled dementholized cornmint oil), which adds the
desirable sweet peppermint top note. Table 3 compares the major impurities present in
synthetic menthol and natural menthol samples from major producing areas (16).
Although not generally commercially available, menthol produced from M. piperita oil
has a sweeter peppermint top note than that produced from cornmint oil (JC Leffingwell,
unpublished observations).
Synthetic (–)-menthol is normally about plus 99.8% pure and has less of the minty top
note present in natural menthol. Again, this can be adjusted to increase the mint character, if
desired, by the addition of a small amount of terpeneless peppermint oils.
Menthol-Related Cooling Agents
Interest in menthol-related cooling agents began in the late 1950s to 1960s when several
tobacco companies began to develop various esters as potential menthol release agents (17–19),
some of which now appear on the flavor extract manufacturers association’s GRAS list. Among
those of interest today is monomenthyl succinate (MMS) (FEMA# 3810) (18), which was later
patented by Mane as a cooling agent for general use (20). In addition, menthol ethylene glycol
carbonate (Frescolat1 MGC), with FEMA# 3805, and menthol propylene glycol carbonate
(Frescolat MPC), with FEMA# 3806, were first patented as tobacco flavorants (19), again to be
later patented by Haarmann and Reimer for general cooling usages (21).
A number of other menthol-related cooling agents are commercially available:
menthone glycerol ketal (Frescolat MGA) (22)—both the racemic (FEMA# 3808) and leavo
forms (FEMA# 3807); the leavo form appears to be the main item of commerce. This material
provides a clean cooling refreshing effect and as a partial replacement of peppermint oil has
been shown to provide longer-lasting sweetness and a higher cooling sensation in chewing
gum (23). (–)-Menthyl lactate (Frescolat ML) is faintly minty in odor and virtually tasteless
with a pleasant, long-lasting cooling effect (24). Recently, Erman has shown that the (–)-ML
of commerce has the ‘S’ configuration for the hydroxy moiety, indicating the fact that it is
produced by the esterification of (–)-menthol with (S)-(+)-lactic acid (25). 3-(l-Menthoxy)
propane-1,2-diol, known as MPD, Coolact1 agent 10, TK-10, and coolant agent 10, is another
important commercial cooling agent, which, in contrast to menthol, is essentially odorless (26).
The cooling threshold (in mouth) is 1 ppm (about 20–100% that of menthol), and the time of
cold-feeling maintenance is 20 to 25 minutes for a 100-ppm solution (about twice that of
menthol). While the cooling strength of Coolact agent 10 is accepted as being about 20% to
25% that of menthol, it is also noted that “in a Vaseline ointment, 3-(l-menthoxy)propane-1,2-
diol shows a cool feeling 2.0 to 2.5 times stronger than that of (–)-menthol” (27). The cool-
feeling intensity of the (2S) isomer is 2 to 3 times that of the (2R) isomer and 1.5 to 2 times
Table 3
Major Impurities in Synthetic and Natural Menthols
Major impurities
Synthetic
%
Brazil 1
%
Brazil 2
%
China 1
%
China 2
%
India
%
Menthone
0.0069
0.0258
0.0258
0.0135
0.0350
0.0295
Isomenthone
0.0000
0.0069
0.0172
0.0052
0.0123
0.0155
Menthyl acetate
0.0000
0.0100
0.0148
0.0014
0.0128
0.0048
Isopulegol
0.0022
0.1868
0.1651
0.1374
0.1914
0.1789
Neomenthol
0.0032
0.0689
0.1339
0.0951
0.0882
0.1079
Neoisomenthol
0.0000
0.0075
0.0459
0.0352
0.0177
0.0368
Isomenthol
0.0299
0.0099
0.0442
0.0296
0.0248
0.0322
Piperitone
0.0000
0.0053
0.0046
0.0018
0.0031
0.0024
Totals
0.0422
0.3211
0.4515
0.3192
0.3853
0.4080
Source: From Ref. 16.
664
Leffingwell

=== Page 682 ===
superior to that of the racemic modification (28). Similarly, the related menthoxyalkanols,
3-(l-menthoxy)-2-methylpropane-1,2-diol (FEMA# 3849), 3-(l-menthoxy)ethanol (Coolact 5),
FEMA# 4154, 3-(l-menthoxy)propan-1-ol, and 3-(l-menthoxy)butan-1-ol have cooling proper-
ties (29). Interestingly, cooling compounds such as 3-(l-menthoxy)propane-1,2-diol and 3-
(l-menthoxy)-2-methylpropane-1,2-diol when admixed with warming sensates (e.g., vanillyl
butyl ether, ginger extract, or capsicum tincture) provide increased warmth and longer-
lasting warmth in cosmetic and flavor systems (27,30,31). Conversely, it has also been observed
that admixtures of such cooling compounds with the warming sensate vanillin-MPD (the acetal
of 3-(l-menthoxy) propane-1,2-diol and vanillin), FEMA# 3904, can increase the duration of
cooling sensations (32) (Fig. 3).
(–)-Isopulegol (Coolact P), FEMA# 2962, having a chemical purity of better than 99.7%
and an optical purity of not less than 99.7% ee, is odorless and gives a feeling of freshness,
crispness, and coolness. The cooling strength is about 20% to 30% that of (–)-menthol (33). The
p-menthane-3,8-diols (Coolact 38D, PMD38), FEMA# 4053, consist of a mixture of (+)-cis and
Figure 3
Menthoxy-related coolants.
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action
665

=== Page 683 ===
(–)-trans PMD38 in a ratio of ~62:38 and possesses a cooling strength of about 11% that of
(–)-menthol (27,34). PMD38 is a nature identical material that occurs in a number of citronellal-
rich oils (e.g., Litsea cubeba, Eucalyptus citriodora) and is also effective as an insect repellant
(34–36). (–)-Monomenthyl glutarate (Physcool 2, MMG), FEMA# 4006, is a nature identical
cooling agent that has been found in Litchi sinensis accompanied by (–)-dimenthyl glutarate
(37). It has been described as “probably the longest-lasting oral cooling agent that is
commercially available” (38). Recently, an improved synthesis has been reported for both
MMG and MMS that minimizes the amount of diester impurities (39). Similarly, (–)-MMS has
been confirmed to be nature identical by its isolation from Lycium barbarum and M. piperita (37).
A recent description of MMS indicates that it is virtually tasteless and has well-balanced
cooling onset and length of cooling (38). Questice1 (menthyl pyrrolidin-2-one 5-carboxylate)
was first patented as a composition of matter that acts as a long-lasting cooling and fresh
ingredient in toothpaste. The cooling properties are due to the enzymatic hydrolytic release of
menthol. A liquid form was produced by reacting (–)-menthol with L-pyrrolidin-2-one
carboxylic acid, while a crystalline form was produced when racemic DL-pyrrolidin-2-one
carboxylic acid is employed (40). Surprisingly, it did not appear on the GRAS list until 2005
with FEMA# 2155 (41). However, it has long been employed in various cosmetics, lotions, etc.
Recently, Erman has shown that the liquid form of Questice is a diastereoisomeric mixture of
(–)-menthyl 5-oxopyrrolidine-2-carboxylates with a ratio of the 5S:5R configuration of ~91:8,
while the solid form has a ratio of ~46:53 (25). (–)-Menthyl 3-hydroxybutyrate (MHB), FEMA#
4308, is another recent addition to the GRAS list (42). This is reported by workers at Takasago
as having a long-acting excellent cooling effect and is odorless and tasteless. Potential uses
include foods, drinks, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and cigarettes (43). Other workers indicate
that the cooling effect is slightly stronger than ML (about 48% the cooling strength of
menthol) (44). Firmenich workers have recently found that a diastereoisomeric mixture of the
6-isopropyl-3,9-dimethyl-1,4-dioxaspiro[4.5]decan-2-ones, prepared by reacting lactic acid
with cis and trans-menthones, provides a minty, fresh, piperita-type flavor that is remarkable
by its strength and cleanness. In combination with other cooling agents (e.g., menthyl succinate
or menthol), a synergist increase in cooling strength was found. In particular, the (3S,5R,6S,9R)
and (3S,5S,6S,9R) isomers are preferred (45). A patent describes the use of certain esters such as
(–)-menthyl methoxyacetate and (–)-menthyl 3,6-dioxaheptanoate as cooling agents (46). In
addition to the cooling properties, (–)-menthyl methoxyacetate has a head note and fruity taste
resembling that of menthyl acetate, whereas (–)-menthyl 3,6-dioxaheptanoate has a bitter taste.
Cubebol, a natural isolate of cubeb oil, in which it normally occurs at levels of 10% to 30% (47),
is a sesquiterpenoid alcohol that has a certain stereochemical resemblance to menthol and,
while not menthol derived, is included here for completeness. Cubebol has only a very weak
smell and taste and provides a refreshing effect that develops in the mouth after a delay of
approximately 1 to 2 minutes and lasts for approximately 30 minutes. It has applications in
flavors, oral care, pharmaceutical products, etc. (48).
Carboxamide Cooling Agents
During the early 1970s, Wilkinson Sword Ltd. conducted an extensive research program in
which they designed and evaluated about 1200 compounds for their cooling activity (49,50).
The interest in such compounds related to cooling agents without the minty and volatile
side effects of menthol, such as eye irritation, in aftershave lotions, etc. Over 25 U.S. patents
were issued on these materials (51). Of these original Wilkinson Sword compounds, three
were initially commercialized: WS-3 (N-ethyl-p-menthane-3-carboxamide) (52), WS-23
(2-isopropyl-N,2,3-trimethylbutyramide) (53), and WS-14 [N-([ethoxycarbonyl]methyl)-p-
menthane-3-carboxamide] (52). WS-3 was given GRAS status (FEMA# 3455) in 1975 (54) and
WS-23 (FEMA# 3804) in 1996 (55). Interestingly, WS-14 was used as a cooling agent for the
Northwind cigarette introduced into test market in 1981. This test market was short lived, but it
is not clear if this was because of market failure or concern that the additive testing conducted
was insufficient to pass Food and Drug Administration (FDA) scrutiny (56). WS-14 is
commercially available as ICE 4000 cooling sensate (57) and finds some applications as a
topical cooling agent (Fig. 4).
In 2007, WS-5 [ethyl 3-(p-menthane-3-carboxamido)acetate], which is currently the
coldest of all commercial cooling agents, was granted GRAS status as FEMA# 4309 (42). It has
been found that only highly purified WS-5 is suitable for flavoring purposes (58), as less pure
666
Leffingwell

=== Page 684 ===
material exhibits a powerful bitter taste. WS-3 and WS-23 are currently the two largest
volume carboxamide coolants. They are widely used in flavors, especially for chewing gum,
breath fresheners, confectionaries, and oral care. They also find use in cosmetics (e.g.,
aftershave lotions). As both WS-3 and WS-23 are solids, there has been considerable interest
in developing blends of such cooling agents that provide strong cooling but are easy to
handle liquids. For example, it has been found that mixtures of ML, WS-3, and propylene
glycol form stable liquid systems (59). It has also been shown that WS-3, WS-5, WS-14, and
WS-23, alone or in certain combinations, when mixed with ML (or other coolants such as
menthoxypropane-1,2-diol) will form stable liquid systems (60), and such mixtures often give
a synergistic increase in cooling sensation. Similarly, eutectic mixtures of WS-3 and WS-23
provide liquid cooling systems (61,62), which can be used either as cooling agents or as flavor
and saltiness enhancers.
Another compound that can be classified either as a carboxamide or a menthyl ester is
N,N-dimethyl menthyl succinamide (FEMA# 4230 for the racemate). An International Flavors &
Fragrances (IFF) patent (63) describes this as having a cooling onset time of 25 seconds with
cooling duration of 11.25 minutes. The taste/sensory profile is “cooling and refreshing on
tongue, palate and front gums; fruity flavor with estery top-notes and sour undertones” (at
25 ppm in water). In a chewing gum at 0.2%, it increased sweetness and exhibited a pleasant and
substantive cooling effect on the tongue and roof of the mouth.
Other examples of newly discovered carboxamides coolants are a series of analogs of
WS-23 [such as N-(2-ethoxyethyl)-2-isopropyl-2,3-dimethylbutanamide] patented by Qaroma
(64) and aryl carboxamide analogs (with the reversed amide configuration) by Givaudan (65),
many with cooling intensities equal to or greater than WS-23. For example, N-(1-isopropyl-1,2-
dimethylpropyl)-1,3-benzodioxole-5-carboxamide has about 2.2 times more cooling intensity
as compared with 2 ppm of menthol (Fig. 5).
Figure 5
Recent WS-23 analogs.
Figure 4
Successful Wilkinson sword
coolants.
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action
667

=== Page 685 ===
Of particular interest are various aryl p-menthane-3-carboxamides, such as N-benzo[1,3]
dioxol-5-yl-3-p-menthanecarboxamide and N-benzooxazol-4-yl-3-p-menthanecarboxamide, which
are reported to have 100 times more cooling intensity than menthol (when compared with
menthol at 2 ppm) (66).
In 2004, T. Hasegawa Co. Ltd. patented a new series of strong cooling compounds on the
basis of alkyloxy amides of the p-menthane series, which exhibit no bitterness; compound
HASE-1 is an example (Fig. 6) (67).
Further, Wei (68) has shown that several materials related to WS-5 possess strong cooling
with remarkable cooling longevity. For example, the methyl and ethyl ester analogs of WS-5
(referred to as D-Ala-O-Me and D-Ala-O-Et, respectively) are produced from D-alanine (rather
than glycine). Similarly, when D-homoserine lactone is employed, the resultant compound
is N-(R)-2-oxotetrahydrofuran-3-y1-(1R,2S,5R)-p-menthane-3-carboxamide (referred to as
“D-HSL”), which also is a potent long-lasting coolant. By combining suitable sympathomimetic
amine drugs that act as a-adrenergic receptor agonists to form the corresponding p-menthane
carboxamides, Wei found certain compounds (such as L-phenylephrine p-menthane carbox-
amide, referred to as CPS-195) that were effective as long-lasting coolants and possessed
additional therapeutic properties (69). The cooling duration of a number of these, applied to
the skin as a 1% wt/vol in a petrolatum-based ointment, versus leading coolants is shown in
Figure 7.
In the last 10 years, there has been extensive patent activity relative to physiological
cooling agents. Between 1998 and 2007, more than 280 patents were issued (25,63), and from
January 2005 to December 2007 more than 300 patent applications have been filed. It is
beyond the scope of this article to review all of these. However, it should be noted that a
recent activity trend has been the patenting of various combinations of cooling agents, both
to achieve improved cooling properties and/or for liquefaction of solid coolants (59,61,70,71).
For example, it has been found that blends of menthyl glutarate with low levels of
Figure
6
New
p-menthane
carboxamide coolants.
668
Leffingwell

=== Page 686 ===
(–)-isopulegol and/or PMD38 exhibit a remarkable synergistic increase in cooling in oral-care
products (71).
The relative “accepted” cooling strengths of important coolants are shown in Figure 8
(72,73).
It should be noted that “accepted” cooling strengths, primarily associated with topical
skin cooling, do not always agree when compared to oral sensory panel results. This is clearly
shown by results obtained by Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company sensory panels comparing 5% sucrose
solutions of various coolants versus 100-ppm (–)-menthol, as shown in Figure 9 (71).
Figure 8
Approximate “accepted” cooling strengths versus menthol (as 100). Source: From Refs. 72, 73.
Figure 7
Topical cooling duration 1% in ointment. Source: From Refs. 68, 69.
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action
669

=== Page 687 ===
COOLING COMPOUNDS AS INSECT REPELLENTS
As previously mentioned, the PMD38 have shown effectiveness as an insect repellent. Barnard
has compared its efficacy against the leading insect repellants DEET, IR3535 [ethyl 3-(N-
butyl-N-acetyl)-aminopropionate], and KBR3023 [sec-butyl 2-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperidine-1-
carboxylate] (74,75).
Questice (menthyl pyrrolidone carboxylate) has also been patented as an insect repellent
(76) and, Kalbe and Nentwig describe the use of ML or menthol glycerol acetal for repelling
mites and other insects (77). Notably, Gautschi and Blondeau of Givaudan have discovered
that WS-3 (N-ethyl-p-menthane-3-carboxamide) and related N-substituted p-menthane
carboxamides have insect repelling activity against cockroaches equal to or exceeding that
of DEET (diethyl-m-toluamide) (79). Another Givaudan patent application describes the use of
a series of (–)-menthyl carbamates as insect repellents, but is silent relative to their cooling
activity (80).
COLD RECEPTORS AND MECHANISM OF ACTION
The underlying process in thermoreception, whether hot or cold, is dependent on ion transport
across cellular membranes. Cellular membranes consist of an oily phospholipid bilayer, which
would be impermeable to ions such as Kþ or Ca2þ, except for receptor protein ion channels.
The flow of ions through these gated ion channels can cause rapid changes in ion
concentrations, which in turn produce electrical signals that are the basis for many biological
processes (80). In the case of thermoreceptors, these are activated when a thermal (or chemical)
stimulus excites primary afferent sensory neurons of the dorsal or trigeminal ganglia (81).
In the last 12 years, there has been tremendous progress in determining the various
receptor structural sequences. Thermoreceptors belong to the class of transient receptor
potential (TRP) channels of which seven subfamilies exist (TRPC, TRPV, TRPM, TRPA, TRPP,
TRPML, and TRPN). Six members of three TRP subfamilies are involved in mammalian
Figure 9
Relative oral cooling in 5% sucrose solutions versus 100 ppm menthol. Source: From Ref. 71.
670
Leffingwell

=== Page 688 ===
temperature-sensitive thermoreception. The closely related TRPV analogs are activated by
heat, TRPV1 (438C), TRPV2 (528C), TRPV3 (22–408C), and TRPV4 (>~278C), while TRPM8
(<~288C) and TRPA1 (<~188C) are activated by cold (80). Certain types of chemical agonists
activate these same thermoTRP channels. TRPV1 was the first thermoreceptor characterized
and is referred to as a vanilloid receptor, as it is activated by capsaicin as well as heat. The cold
and menthol receptor, TRPM8, was characterized by McKemy, Neuhausser, and Julius (82)
and by Peier et al. (83) in 2002. Paradoxically, the cold receptor TRPA1, which is activated by
noxious cold to produce a pain-like sensation, produces a human sensorial effect often
described as “hot.”
Table 4 provides examples of chemical agonists that activate these thermoTRPs.
All of these thermoTRPs are gated Ca2þ channels consisting of six transmembrane
domains (TM1–TM6) flanked by large N- and C-terminal cytoplasmic domains (80). A schematic
representation is shown in Figure 10 with the putative ion channel between TM5–TM6 in
TRPM8, which is activated by menthol and other cold stimuli. In the case of TRP channels, it has
been shown that they can oligomerize into tetramer assemblies, which presumably modulate the
calcium ion gating processes (85–87).
Much of the knowledge gained on TRP activation by chemical stimuli has been derived
by genetic expression of putative receptor domains and measurement of Ca2+ flux intensity by
fluorometric imaging assays. Behrendt et al. used this technique to screen 70 odorants and
menthol-related substances for activity on the recombinant cold-menthol receptor TRPM8
Table 4
Thermoreceptor Agonists
Chemical agonist (botanical source)
ThermoTRP
Capsaicin (hot chilli peppers, e.g., Tabasco1)
TRPV1
Piperine (black pepper corns)
TRPV1
Allicin (fresh garlic)
TRPV1, TRPA1
Camphor (Cinnamomum camphora)
TRPV3, TRPV1
D-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (Cannabis sativa)
TRPV2, TRPA1
2-Aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (synthetic)
TRPV1, TRPV2, TRPV3
4-a-phorbol 12,13-didecanoate (synthetic)
TRPV4
(-)-Menthol (peppermint)
TRMP8, TRPV3
1,8-Cineole, eucalyptol (eucalyptus)
TRPM8
WS-3 (synthetic)
TRPM8
Icilin (synthetic)
TRPM8, TRPA1
Cinnamaldehyde (cinnamon, cassia)
TRPA1, TRPV3
Allyl isothiocyanate (mustard, horseradish)
TRPA1
Benzyl isothiocyanate (mustard, horseradish)
TRPA1
Phenethyl isothiocyanate (mustard, horseradish)
TRPA1
Abbreviation: TRP, transient receptor potential.
Source: From Refs. 80, 84.
Figure 10
TRPM8 receptor channel.
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action
671

=== Page 689 ===
(mTRPM8), as expressed in HEK293 cells (88). The percentage efficacy of the most active
candidates as compared to menthol is shown in Figure 11.
Although the fluorometric assay technique does not always translate into the human
perception scale, it is already being used in industry to screen for promising new coolants (89).
In conclusion, from peppermint to menthol and to a plethora of new novel cooling
compounds, we are now beginning to understand the importance of cooling substances even
in the genetics of life. From early menthol-camphor-based over-the-counter (OTC) pharma-
ceuticals, which created famous trademarks such as Vicks1 Vaporub and Mentholatum1 in
the early 20th century, to improved modern toothpastes, gums, breath fresheners, and
cosmetic lotions, we expect this is just the beginning of even greater things for the future.
REFERENCESa
1. Guenther E. The Essential Oils, Vol. 3. Huntington NY: Robert E Krieger Pub. Co., 1974:640–676.
2. Gildemeister E, Hoffmann Fr. The Volatilte Oils. English translation by E. Kremers. Milwaukee:
Pharmaceutical Review Pub. Co., 1900:631–640.
3. Flu¨ckiger FA. Pharmakognosie des Pflanzenreiches, 2d ed. Berlin: R. Gaertner’s Buchhandlung, 1883:
686. Available at: http://www.digibib.tu-bs.de/?docid=00000684. Accessed December 4, 2007.
4. Clark GS. Aroma chemical profile – menthol. Perfumer & Flavorist 2007; 32(12):32–47.
5. Menthol—A Cool Place. Available at: http://www.leffingwell.com/menthol1/menthol1.htm. Accessed
December 5, 2007.
6. Hopp R, Lawrence BM. Natural and synthetic menthol. In: Lawrence BM, ed. Mint: The Genus Mentha,
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2006: 371–398.
7. Fleischer J, Bauer K, Hopp R. Separating Optically Pure d- and l-Isomers of Menthol, Neomenthol and
Isomenthol. US patent 3 943 181. March 9, 1976.
8. Menthol—A Cool Place. Available at: http://www.leffingwell.com/menthol10/menthol10.htm.
Accessed December 5, 2007.
Figure 11
Efficacy of coolants on the TRPM8 receptor (by Ca2+ fluorometric assay). Source: From Refs. 72,
73, 88.
a Note on Trademarks: Words that we know or have reason to believe constitute registered trademarks, 1, are
designated as such in the text. However, neither the presence nor absence of such designation should be
regarded as affecting the legal status of any trademark.
672
Leffingwell

=== Page 690 ===
9. Akutagawa S. Enantioselective isomerization of allylamine to enamine: practical asymmetric
synthesis of (–)-menthol by Rh-BINAP catalysts. Top Catal 1997; 4(3–4):271–274.
10. Tani T, Yamagata T, Akutagawa S, et al. Metal-assisted terpenoid synthesis. 7. Highly enantioselective
isomerization of prochiral allylamines catalyzed by chiral diphosphine rhodium (I) complexes.
Preparation of optically active enamines. J Am Chem Soc 1984; 106(18):5208–5217.
11. Noyori R. Asymmetric catalysis: science and opportunities (Nobel Lecture, December 8, 2001) in Les
Prix Nobel. The Nobel Prizes 2001. Fra¨ngsmyr T. ed. Stockholm: Nobel Foundation, 2002: 192–193.
Available at: http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/2001/noyori-lecture.pdf.
Accessed December 5, 2007.
12. Read J. Recent progress in the menthone chemistry. Chem Rev 1930; 7(1):1–50.
13. Read J, Grubb WJ, Malcolm D. Researches in the menthone series. Part XI. Diagnosis and characterization
of the stereoisomeric menthols. J Chem Soc 1933; 170–173.
14. Hopp R. Menthol: its origins, chemistry, physiology and toxicological properties. Rec Adv Tob Sci
1993; 19:3–46.
15. Leffingwell JC, Shackelford RE. Leavo menthol – syntheses and organoleptic properties. Cosmetics
and Perfumery 1974; 89(6):69–89.
16. Ayya N, de Wijk R, Frijters J. Sensory characteristics of various menthols using an injection olfactometer.
1994. Available at: http://legacy.library.ucsf.edu/tid/wzg93f00. Accessed December 4, 2007.
17. Milleville G, Winkler G. Verfahren zum Mentholisieren von Tabak und zur.Herstellung von
Mentholzigaretten. German patent 1 065 767. September 18, 1959.
18. Jarboe CH. Smoking tobacco product and method of making the same. US patent 3 111 127.
November 19, 1963.
19. Mold JD, Kallianos AG, Shellburne FA. Tobacco incorporating carbonate esters of flavorants. US
patent 3 332 428. July 25, 1967.
20. Mane JM. Coolant compositions. US patent 5 725 865. March 19, 1998.
21. Pelzer R, Surburg H, Hopp R. Mittel mit physiologischem Ku¨hleffekt und fu¨r diese Mittel geeignete
wirksame Verbindungen. German patent 4 226 043. November 2, 1994.
22. Grub H, Pelzer R, Hopp, R. , et al. Compositions which have a physiological cooling effect, and active
compounds suitable for these compositions. US patent 5 266 592. November 30, 1993.
23. Greenberg MJ. Enhanced flavors using menthone ketals. US patent 5 348 750. September 20, 1994.
24. Bauer K, Bruening J, Grueb H. Mittel mit physiologischer Kuhlwirkung. German patent 2 608 226.
September 8, 1977.
25. Erman M. New developments in physiological cooling agents. Perfumer & Flavorist 2007; 32(10):20–35.
26. Amano A, Moroe M, Yoshida T. 3-Levo-Menthoxypropane-1,2-diol. US patent 4 459 425. July 10, 1984.
27. Shiroyama K, Sawano K, Ohta H. Cool feeling composition. US patent 6 328 982. Dec 11, 2001.
28. Amano A, Tokoro K. (2S)-3-(1R, 2S, 5R)-5-methyl-2-(1-methylethyl)-cyclohexyl]oxy]-1,2-propanediol,
process for producing the same, and compositions containing the same. US patent 5 608 119. March 4, 1997.
29. Green C, Nakatsu T, Ishizaki T. (1R, 2S, 5R)-3-1-menthoxyalkan-1-ol cooling sensate. US patent 6 956
139. October 18, 2005.
30. Kumamoto H, Ohta H. Warming composition. US patent 6 673 844. January 6, 2004.
31. Kumamoto H, Kitamura T. Warming composition for food and drink or for oral care preparation. US
patent 6 838 106. January 4, 2005.
32. Nakatsu T, Green CB, Reitz GA. Fragrance composition containing 4-(1-menthoxymethyl)-2-phenyl-
1,3-dioxolane or its derivatives. US patent 5 753 609. May 19, 1998.
33. Yamamoto T. Method for purifying (–)-N-isopulegol and citrus perfume composition containing
(–)-N-isopulegol obtained by the method. US patent 5 773 410. June 30, 1998.
34. Kenmochi H, Akiyama T, Yuasa Y, et al. Method for producing para-menthane-3,8-diol. US patent 5
959 161. September 28, 1999.
35. Beldock DT, Beldock JA, Mudge G. Insect repellent blends, lotions, and sprays. US patent 5 621 013.
April 15, 1997.
36. West Nile Virus. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/RepellentUpdates.htm.
Accessed December 16, 2007.
37. Hiserodt RD, Adedeji J, John TV. et al. Identification of monomenthyl succinate, monomenthyl
glutarate, and dimenthyl glutarate in nature by high performance liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry. J Agric Food Chem 2004; 52(11):3536–3541.
38. Dewis ML. Molecules of taste and sensation. In: Rowe DJ, ed.Chemistry and Technology of Flavors
and Fragrances, Oxford: Blackwell Pub. Ltd, 2004:199–243.
39. Erman MB, Snow JW, Lebedev MY. Process for making monomenthyl esters. US patent 7 247 743. July
24, 2007.
40. Humbert FEL, Guth G. Esters of menthol and 2-pyrrolidone or piperidine carboxylic acids. US patent
3 917 613. November 4, 1975.
41. Smith RL, Cohen SM, Doull J, et al. GRAS Flavoring substances 22. Food Technol 2005; 59( 8): 24–28,
31–32, 34, 36–62.
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action
673

=== Page 691 ===
42. Waddell WJ, Cohen SM, Feron VJ, et al. GRAS flavoring substances 23. Food Technol 2007; 61(8):
22–48.
43. Yamamoto T, Amano A, Kobayashi T. L-Menthyl 3-ydroxybutyrate, production thereof, and chilling
agent containing said compound as active component. Japanese patent 6 119 4049. August 28, 1986.
44. Pringle S, Brassington D. The chemistry of F&F: physiological coolants. Perfumer & Flavorist 2007;
32(1):38–42.
45. Giersch WK, Vanrietvelde CLA, et al. Flavor ingredients for cooling preparations, US patent
application 20060249167. November 9, 2006.
46. Frerot E, Van Beem N. Compounds derived from menthol and use as refreshing agent. US patent 6
359 168. March 19, 2002.
47. Boelens Aroma Chemical Information Service, ESO 2000 (update 2006) – The Complete Database of
Essential Oils. Canton GA: Leffingwell & Associates, Pub. 2006.
48. Velazco MI, Wuensche L, Deladoey P. Use of cubebol as a flavoring ingredient. US patent 6 214 788.
April 10, 2001.
49. Watson HR. Flavor characteristics of synthetic cooling compounds. In: Apt CM, ed.Flavor: It’s
Chemical, Behavioral & Commercial Aspects. Boulder: Westview Press, 1977:31–50.
50. Watson HR, Hems R, Roswell DG, et al. New compounds with the menthol cooling effect. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1978; 29( 4): 185–200
51. The US Patent and Trademark Office. Available at: http://www.uspto.gov/patft/index.html.
52. Watson HR, Roswell DG, Spring DJ. N-Substituted paramenthane carboxamides. US patent 4 178 459.
December 11, 1979.
53. Roswell DG, Spring D, Hems R. Aliphatic N-Substituted Tertiary Amides Possessing Physiological
Cooling Activity. Great Britain patent 1 421 744. January 21, 1976.
54. Oser BL, Ford RA. Recent progress in the consideration of flavoring ingredients under the Food
Additives Amendment. 9. GRAS substances. Food Technol 1975; 29(8):70–72.
55. Smith RL, Newberne P, Adams TB, et al. GRAS flavoring substances 17. Food Technol 1996; 50(10):72–81.
56. Legacy Tobacco Documents. Available at: http://legacy.library.ucsf.edu/tid/mds88d00. Accessed
December 18, 2007.
57. Qaroma. Available at: http://www.qaroma.com. Accessed December 18, 2007.
58. Erman MB, Whelan P. Physiological cooling compositions containing highly purified ethyl ester of
N-5-methyl-2-(1-methylethyl) cyclohexyl. carbonyl]glycine. US patent 7 189 760. March 13, 2007.
59. Galopin C, Moraes E, Tigani L. Coolant solutions and compositions comprising the same. US patent
application 20060051301. March 9, 2006.
60. Erman MB, Whelan PJ, Snow JW. Physiological cooling compositions. US patent application
20050265930. December 1, 2005.
61. Moza AK, Sun H, Leffingwell JC. Liquid composition of 2-Isopropyl-N,2,3-trimethylbutyramide and
N-Ethyl-p-menthane-3-carboxamide, its preparation method and its applications as a cooling agent
and flavor enhancer. US patent application 20070048424. March 1, 2007.
62. Moza AK, Rohde SE, Leffingwell JC. Cooling agents as flavor and saltiness enhancers. US patent
application 20070059417. March 15, 2007.
63. Dewis ML, Huber ME, Cossette MV. Menthyl half acid ester derivatives, processes for preparing
same, and uses thereof for their cooling/refreshing effect in consumable materials. US patent 6 884
906. April 26, 2005.
64. Sun H. Novel compounds with physiological cooling effect. US patent 7 030 273. April 18, 2007.
65. Cole L, Furrer SM, Galopin C. Cooling Compounds. PCT WO 2006/099762. September 28, 2006.
66. Cole L, Furrer SM, Galopin C. Menthane Carboxamide Derivatives Having Cooling Properties. PCT
WO 2006/092074. September 8, 2006.
67. Takazawa O, Wanatabe H, Iso M. p-Menthane Derivative and Cold Sensing Agent Containing the
Same. Japanese patent 2004059474. February 26, 2004.
68. Wei ET. N-Alkylcarbonyl-Amino Acid Ester and N-Alkylcarbonyl-Amino Lactone Compounds and
Their Use. PCT WO 2006103401. October 5, 2006.
69. Wei ET. N-arylshydroxyalkylidene-carboxamide compositions and methods. US patent application
20070155755. July 5, 2007.
70. Kiefer J, Harvey JE. Cooling compositions. US patent application 20070077331. April 5, 2007.
71. Johnson SS, Stawski BZ, Sheldon GT. Confections Containing a Blend of Physiological Cooling
Agents. US patent application 20070248717. October 25, 2007.
72. Erman M. Progress in physiological cooling agents. Perfumer & Flavorist 2004; 29(8):34–50.
73. Leffingwell JC. Cool without Menthol & Cooler than Menthol and Cooling Compounds as Insect
Repellents. Available at: http://www.leffingwell.com/cooler_than_menthol.htm. Accessed December
18, 2007.
74. Barnard DR. Global collaboration for development of pesticides for public health (GCDPP):
Repellents and toxicants for personal protection. Geneva Switzerland, :WHO Position Paper, World
Health Organization, 2000; 1–49.
674
Leffingwell

=== Page 692 ===
75. Barnard, DR, Bernier UR, Posey KH, et al. Repellency of IR3535, KBR3023, para-menthane-3,8-diol,
and Deet to Black Salt Marsh Mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) in the Everglades National Park USA J
Med Entomol 2002; 39(6):895–899.
76. Watkins S, Hills MJ, Birch RA. Use of menthyl-2 pyrrolidone-5-carboxylate as an insect repellent.
US patent 6 451 844. September 17, 2002.
77. Kalbe J, Nentwig G. Non-toxic, inexpensive arthropodicide comprises diacid ester, N-methyl-
pyrrolidone, caprolactone or glycerol or menthol derivative, effective against insects, mites and ticks,
especially dust mites. German patent 19840321. March 9, 2000.
78. Blondeau P, Gautschi M. Composition having insect repellent characteristics. US patent application
20040028714. February 12, 2004.
79. Gautschi M. Insect repellents. US patent application 20060063764. March 23, 2006.
80. Voets T, Talavera K, Owsianik G, et al. Sensing with TRP channels. Nature Chem Biol 2004; 1(2):85–92.
81. Jordt S-E, McKemy DD, Julius D. Lessons from peppers and peppermint: the molecular logic of
thermosensation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2003; 13(4):487–492.
82. McKemy DD, Neuha¨usser WM, Julius D. Identification of a cold receptor reveals a general role for
TRP channels in thermosensation. Nature 2002; 416:52–58.
83. Peier AM, Moqrich A, Hergarden AC, et al. A TRP channel that senses cold stimuli and menthol. Cell
2002; 108(5):705–715.
84. Jordt S-E, Bautista DM, Chuang H, et al. Mustard oils and cannabinoids excite sensory nerve fibres
through the TRP channel ANKTM1. Nature 2004; 427:260–265.
85. Hoenderop JGJ, Voets T, Hoefs S, et al. Homo- and heterotetrameric architecture of the epithelial Ca2+
channels TRPV5 and TRPV6. EMBO J 2003; 22(4):776–785.
86. Voets T, Janssens A, Droogmans G, et al. Outer pore architecture of a Ca2+-selective TRP channel.
J Biol Chem 2004; 279(15):15223–15230.
87. Phelps CB, Gaudet R. The role of the N Terminus and Transmembrane Domain of TRPM8 in Channel
Localization and Tetramerization. J Biol Chem 2007; 282(50):36474–36480.
88. Behrendt H-J, Germann T, Gillen C, et al. Characterization of the mouse cold-menthol receptor
TRPM8 and vanilloid receptor type-1 VR1 using a fluorometric imaging plate reader (FLIPR) assay.
Brit J Pharm 2004; 141(4):737–745.
89. Servant GS, Brust P, Moyer B, et al. Optimized TRPM8 nucleic acid sequences and their USE in cell
based assays and test kits to identify TRPM8 Modulators. US patent application 20070259354.
November 8, 2007.
Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action
675

=== Page 694 ===
66
Oral Cosmetics
Nathalie Demeester, Dirk Vanden Berghe, and Mario R. Calomme
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
Andre´ O. Barel
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
As a living tissue, the skin requires nourishment to stay healthy. This nourishment cannot be
provided by topical preparations only, but it largely comes from foods that are rich in
vitamins, minerals, essential fatty acids, and other nutrients, which are crucial for optimal skin
health and wellness. Skin functioning relies on specific nutritional needs, as evidenced by the
development of skin disorders in response to various nutritional deficiencies (1,2).
Supplementation with vitamins, minerals, and other dietary constituents was shown to
improve skin conditions (3–5).
Cosmetics are preparations for topical use, i.e., products intended to be rubbed, poured,
sprinkled, or sprayed on, introduced into, or otherwise applied to the human body for
cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance. Among the
products included in this definition are skin moisturizers, perfumes, lipsticks, fingernail
polishes, eye and facial makeup preparations, shampoos, permanent waves, hair colors,
toothpastes, and deodorants as well as any material intended for use as a component of a
cosmetic product (6). Cosmeceuticals are topical preparations specifically designed to improve
the appearance of aging skin (7). The term “oral cosmetics” is used in the present chapter with
respect to dietary supplements, which claim to have a beneficial, physiological effect on skin,
hair, or nails, i.e., these are preparations for oral use only, such as capsules, tablets, liquids, or
granulates. In this chapter, we will focus on oral antiaging preparations.
AIM OF ORAL COSMETICS
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Aging
Human skin represents the body’s barrier to the external environment preventing it from
mechanical damage, noxious substances, invading microorganisms and radiation. Moreover,
the skin plays an important role in homeostatic regulation, controlling water retention, sensory
perception, and immune surveillance (8,9). Aging leads to several changes in the skin and its
appendages (i.e., hair and nails). These changes can be broadly categorized as either intrinsic
aging (chronobiological) or photoaging (actinic aging). Oral cosmetics can be formulated to
slow down this aging process.
Intrinsic aging is, by definition, inevitable and thus not subject to manipulation through
changes in human behavior. Skin that ages intrinsically is smooth and unblemished and
characterized by some deepening of skin surface markings (small wrinkles). Histologically,
such skin manifests epidermal and dermal atrophy, reduced numbers of melanocytes,
Langerhans cells, fibroblasts, and increased cell architecture disorders (10,11). Telomere
shortening combined with metabolic oxidative damage is believed to play a major role in the
intrinsic aging process (11,12).
Conversely, extrinsic aging is engendered by factors that originate externally and are
introduced to the human body, such as smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, poor
nutrition, and chronic exposure to the sun (13). Sun exposure is considered to be the most
significantly deleterious to the skin; 80% of facial aging is believed to be due to chronic sun
exposure (11). Leathery surface of the skin with blotches, yellowing, and deep wrinkles
comprise the clinical presentation of photoaged skin. A marked decrease in collagen,

=== Page 695 ===
glycosaminoglycans, and proteoglycans is observed. Losses in tone and elasticity, epidermal
atrophy, and distinct alterations in collagen and elastic fibers are also associated with
photoaged skin. In aged skin, collagen is characterized by thickened fibrils, organized in
ropelike bundles that appear to be in disarray in comparison to the pattern observed in
younger skin. Alterations in elastic fibers are so strongly associated with photoaged skin that
“elastosis,” an accumulation of amorphous elastin material, is considered pathognomonic of
photoaged skin (9,11,14–17). Compounds, which stimulate the synthesis or inhibit the
degradation of connective tissue components (e.g., collagen, keratin, and glycosaminoglycans),
may slow down the aging process or even rejuvenate the dermis and its appendages. Such
compounds are potential candidates to be used in oral cosmetics.
Photoaging
Extensive research in the area of photoaging over the past decade has resulted in an improved
understanding of the molecular mechanism of the aging process. Ultraviolet (UV) light
penetrates into the skin; depending on its wavelength, it interacts with different cells that are
located at different depths. UV light of the shorter wavelengths (UVB, 280–320 nm) is mostly
absorbed in the epidermis and predominantly affects epidermal cells, i.e., keratinocytes, while
longer-wavelength UV light (UVA, 320–400 nm) penetrates deeper and can interact with both
epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts. Melanin pigmentation of the skin absorbs UV
light and thus protects skin cells from the detrimental effects of UV exposure. Once UV light
has reached the cells of the skin, the different wavelengths exert their specific effects. UVA
light mostly acts indirectly through generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). “ROS” or
“pro-oxidants” is a collective term for oxygen-derived species, i.e., oxygen radicals (e.g.,
superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical) and certain non-radicals (e.g., peroxides) that easily
convert into radicals (18). ROS exert a multitude of effects such as lipid peroxidation, activation
of transcription factors, and generation of DNA damage. While UVB light can also generate
ROS, its main mechanism of action is the direct interaction with DNA via induction of DNA
damage (12,19–21).
The skin’s enzymatic antioxidant defense includes an enzymatic and a nonenzymatic
system (Table 1). Copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD), manganese SOD, catalase (CAT),
and the selenoenzyme glutathione peroxide (GPX) have a direct antioxidant function, i.e., SOD
converts superoxide anion into hydrogen peroxide, whereas CAT and GPX degrade hydrogen
peroxide into water. Nonenzymatic antioxidants are classified into two groups, namely,
endogenous (e.g., glutathione, a-lipoic acid) and dietary antioxidants such as vitamins and
polyphenolic compounds (e.g., flavonoids). Cases of increased ROS generation and/or a
depletion of the antioxidant levels will cause oxidative stress defined as a disturbance in the
balance favouring ROS generation and leading to potential tissue damage (21,22). The use of
oral supplements, which contain antioxidants (e.g., polyphenols, vitamin E and A), or
compounds, which stimulate the enzymatic antioxidant system (e.g., selenium compounds to
stimulate GPX activity), may protect the dermis against oxidative stress and prevent tissue
damage.
Immune Function and Inflammation
In the last two decades it has become clear that the skin is an essential part of the immune
system (23). Reduced immune function and inflammation can alter skin condition and
Table 1
Primary Components of the Human Antioxidant Defense System
Enzymatic
Nonenzymatic
Direct antioxidant function:
Endogenous antioxidants:
SOD
a-lipoic acid, glutathione,
GSHPx
melatonin, coenzyme Q
CAT
Indirect antioxidant function:
Dietary antioxidants:
Glutathione-S-transferase
Vitamin C and E
GSSG reductase
Polyphenolic compounds
Abbreviations: SOD, superoxide dismutase; CAT, catalase; GSHPx,
glutathione peroxidase; GSSG, Diglutathione.
678
Demeester et al.

=== Page 696 ===
functioning. Sunburn is a well-known acute effect of sun exposure and is clinically visible as
erythema triggered by inflammation. After a certain threshold of UV exposure is reached,
delayed and prolonged vasodilatation allows the passage of lymphocytes and macrophages
into the tissue, which induces inflammation. Increased dietary intake of antioxidants or oral
anti-inflammatory compounds was suggested to reduce UV irradiation-induced eythrema (3),
i.e., these compounds are useful in the formulation of oral cosmetics claiming specifically
photoprotection.
ACTIVE COMPOUNDS IN ORAL COSMETICS
Screening of Active Compounds
Clearly, the oral route of administration requires other product characteristics compared with
a classical, topical cosmetic, and key issues in the development of an oral cosmetic are
toxicology, bioavailability (absorption and distribution), and metabolization of its components.
In vitro studies and animal studies are useful to study the mechanism of action, but studies in
humans are required to document the efficacy of oral cosmetics to validate product claims.
Observational studies do not have control over product exposure (e.g., longitudinal study) and
are therefore limited to identifying associations between a dietary ingredient and skin benefits;
i.e., such studies cannot provide a sufficient basis to determine whether a significant
correlation between a product and a benefit reflects an underlying rather than a chance
relationship. Intervention studies are more reliable since the investigator can control exposure
of the study population to the investigated product. Nevertheless, these clinical trials should
be randomized, placebo controlled, and double blinded to minimize bias of the study results.
In addition, any change in dietary habits should be avoided, and the intake of other food
supplements should be controlled during the complete study. The use of validated
bioengineering methods combined with both clinical observations by the investigator and
observations by the participant using standardized questionnaires are highly recommended to
evaluate the efficacy of the treatment. Intervention studies to study the effect on the dermis are
lengthy (5–12 months), and the use of a placebo with an identical appearance (e.g., galenic
form, color, taste, and odor) compared with the active product is essential to determine the
seasonal influence and the subjective effect on the investigated parameters. A parallel study
design (i.e., separate groups of volunteers administered different products) is preferred since
seasonal influence may bias the results from crossover studies (i.e., one group of volunteers
administered different products).
Vitamins
Vitamin A (retinol and b-carotene derivatives), C (ascorbic acid), and E (tocopherols) are
dietary antioxidants of particular interest when formulating oral cosmetics. Combined oral
supplementation with vitamins C and E as well as carotenoids provides significant antioxidant
activity in human skin with demonstrated UV protection and enhancement of cutaneous
immune response (8,24).
In a randomized, placebo-controlled double-blind study, a food supplement (Seresis1,
Pharmaton, Switzerland) containing a combination of carotenoids (b-carotene and lycopene),
vitamins C and E, selenium, and proanthocyanidins was administered for three months in
healthy females, and the effect on UV-induced matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-1, MMP-9)
was investigated as a marker of photoprotection (24). In fact, the expressions of MMP-1 and
MMP-9 are known as markers of the activity of the endogenous defense mechanism and are
mainly induced by UVB irradiation. After supplementation and following UV irradiation, a
significant difference was found between active treatment and placebo for MMP-1 with an
increased level in the placebo group compared with a decreased level in the active-treated
group. The changes in MMP-9 showed a similar but nonsignificant trend.
La Ruche and Cesarini investigated in a double-blind, parallel, placebo-controlled trial
the photoprotective effect on the skin of combined intake of a-tocopherol (14 mg) and retinol
(2700 mg) for three weeks in sixteen healthy subjects. Partial protection was observed compared
with placebo at a low irradiation dose (suberythemal) against the formation of sunburn cells.
No difference between placebo and active treatment was observed for the minimal erythema
dose (MED) of UV, which was needed to induce erythema (25).
Oral Cosmetics
679

=== Page 697 ===
Combined oral intake of a-tocopherol, b-carotene, lycopene, and selenium for seven
weeks was found to improve the epidermal defense against UV-induced damage in an open,
single-arm study in 25 healthy volunteers (26). The individual UV sensitivity was measured as
the actinic erythema threshold, and skin biopsies were collected to quantify lipoperoxides and
to evaluate melanogenesis. After treatment with the antioxidant complex, a significant
elevation of the actinic threshold, a general reduction of UV-induced erythema, and a
reduction of lipoperoxide levels were observed, respectively.
Combined intake for 50 days of high doses of a-tocopherol (2 g/day) and ascorbate
(3 g/day) were found to increase the MED compared with placebo in 40 healthy volunteers
(27). These observations were confirmed with lower dosages, i.e., after eight days
supplementation with 671 mg vitamin E and 2 g vitamin C daily, the MED increased
compared with baseline in 8 of 10 subjects, whereas in the placebo group, the MED was
unchanged in 6 of 10 subjects and decreased in 4 subjects. These studies indicate that combined
supplementation of moderate to high doses of vitamin E and C exerts a photoprotective effect.
Several studies indicate that combined intake of a carotene mix such as b-carotene,
a-carotene, cryptoxanthin, zeaxanthin, and lutein lowers the degree of erythema after exposure
to UV irradiation and that this photoprotective effect is more pronounced when carotenes are
combined with vitamin E (28,29). A recent study observed a decrease in sensitivity toward UV-
induced erythema after about 10 to 12 weeks of dietary intervention with carotenoids and
flavonoids (30). Overall, b-carotene exhibits some photoprotection, but carotenoids like
lycopene still need more investigation. Because of concern about possible negative effects from
large doses, most experts agree that getting carotenoids from foods is the safest.
Vitamin C is an essential cofactor of prolyl-4-hydroxylase, an enzyme that hydroxylates
prolyl residues in procollagen, elastin, and other proteins with collagenous domains prior to
triple helix formation (31). Hydroxyproline in elastin has no known function, but prolyl
hydroxylation is essential for efficient collagen production. However, to our knowledge no
clear benefit of oral vitamin C supplementation was demonstrated in humans on collagen
synthesis in the skin or in a collagen-related process such as wound healing (32,33).
Biotin is an essential cofactor for several carboxylases, which catalyze vital steps in
intermediary metabolism in the skin. Deficiency of biotin is known to manifest in various skin
disorders, including dermatitis, scaling, and alopecia (34). Supplementation with large doses of
biotin (2.5 mg) for six to nine months in subjects with documented brittle nails resulted in an
increase of nail thickness and in a reduction of splitting of the nails (35).
Minerals
Few studies have been published, which investigate the effects of oral supplementation of
minerals on aged skin. Zinc is an essential element of more than 200 metalloenzymes,
including the antioxidative enzyme SOD, and has anti-inflammatory actions. Zinc is a
component of enzymes required for DNA replication, gene transcription, and RNA and
protein synthesis (36,37). Roughened skin and impaired wound healing have been reported in
association with a mild zinc deficiency, implicating changes in the skin (38).
There is a popular belief that zinc deficiency can cause hair loss, but no such correlation
is found in published data for alopecia areata (39) or telogen effluvium (40).
Ce´sarini et al. (26) demonstrated that significant photoprotection can be provided by
four- to seven-week supplementation with a specific antioxidant combination of vitamins,
lycopene, and selenium. Selenium is present in the form of selenocysteine in the active center
of the antioxidative enzyme GPX. Selenomethionine was shown to protect skin cells from UV-
induced damage, DNA oxidation, and lipid peroxidation (41). The effect on skin health and
skin aging of supplements containing a combination of lycopene, lutein, b-carotene, vitamin E,
and selenium was investigated in a placebo-controlled study in 39 healthy volunteers.
Roughness and scaling significantly improved after 12 weeks supplementation in the active
group compared with that in the placebo group (42).
Lassus published in 1993 an open study concerning the effect of silicon supplementation
on the skin and hair in 50 women with biologically aged skin and fragile hair or brittle nails
(43). The study showed that combined treatment of oral and topical colloidal silicic acid had a
beneficial effect on biologically aged skin structure and on the condition of hair and nails. The
dermal thickness increased significantly after 90 days of supplementation. In addition, the hair
was significantly thicker and less fragile, and nail brittleness had improved. However, no
680
Demeester et al.

=== Page 698 ===
evidence was presented to support the fact that the colloidal silica was actually absorbed in the
gastrointestinal tract; i.e., it is not clear if the observed effects on the skin are the result of the
oral or the topical treatment with colloidal silicic acid. In fact, it was clearly demonstrated in
other studies that polymerized forms of orthosilicic acid, such as colloidal silica, are not
bioavailable (44). Furthermore, seasonal changes may have biased the observed effects on the
hair, skin, and nails since no placebo control was used in this study.
Polyphenolic Compounds
Polyphenolic compounds are widely distributed in higher plants and are an integral part of the
human diet. In the last decade, the antioxidant activity of flavonoids and other polyphenols
such as proanthocyanidins have been studied in detail (45,46).
Silymarin is a mixture of polyphenolic flavonoids derived from the seeds of the milk
thistle plant Silybum marianu and has been shown in several animal studies to exhibit
antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory properties, which may contribute to
preventing or reducing photoaging (47), especially since silybin (most active component) was
demonstrated to be available in skin after oral intake.
Pycnogenol1 is the registered trademark of a standardized extract obtained from the bark
of French maritime pine, which contains a mixture of procyanidins, also called proanthocya-
nidins, and phenolic acids, which are potent radical scavengers (48,49). Proanthocyanidins can
also be found in grape seed, grape skin, bilberry, cranberry, black currant, green tea, black tea,
blueberry, blackberry, strawberry, black cherry, red wine, and red cabbage. Pycnogenol has been
suggested to support collagen skin density as it displays physical affinity to collagen and elastin
and protects it against proteolytic degradation (50,51).
The efficacy of an oral supplement containing vitamins C and E, carotenoids, selenium,
zinc, amino acids and glycosaminoglycans, and blueberry extract and Pycnogenol, respec-
tively, was tested in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in 62 women. After a six-week
supplementation, skin elasticity and skin roughness improved in the active group compared
with that in the placebo group (8).
Phytoestrogens
Phytoestrogens are polyphenolic nonsteroidal plant compounds with estrogen-like biological
activity, which are classified in four main groups based on their chemical structure, i.e.,
isoflavonoids, flavonoids, stilbenes, and lignans (52). Since phytoestrogens are structurally
similar to estrogen 17-b-estradiol, they may exhibit selective estrogen-modulating activities.
For women, particularly in the postmenopausal years, acceleration of chronologic aging
is enhanced by the loss of estrogen, which causes a rapid loss of collagen during the first five
years after menopause. It is assumed that phytoestrogens such as soy isoflavones may mimic
the effects of estrogen in skin and reduce skin changes in postmenopausal women. A double-
blind study in 26 middle-aged women indicated that oral intake of 40-mg soy isoflavone
aglycones per day improved the extend of fine wrinkles at the lateral angle of the eyes after a
12-week supplementation compared with baseline. However, no significant differences in fine
wrinkles were found between the active treatment group and the placebo group after
supplementation, which may indicate that the observed improvement in the active group was
biased by seasonal changes (53).
It is well documented that systemic hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) with
estrogens, or combinations of estrogen-glucocorticoid, in postmenopausal women improves
the gross appearance of their skin, resulting in decreased slackness, wrinkling, and roughness.
At the microscopic level, HRT seems to affect mostly dermal collagen, increasing its content
and augmenting dermal thickness (8,54,55). It should be noted, however, that HRT has been
correlated with increased cancer risk (56,57). Furthermore, HRT is a drug therapy and certainly
cannot be categorized as an oral cosmetic.
Glycosaminoglycans
It was suggested that extracts derived from marine fish cartilage have a repairing effect on
photodamaged skin. In an open study, 10 females with sun-damaged skin were treated with
0.5 g/day glycosaminoglycans derivatives (Imedeen1, Soeberg, Denmark) for 90 days (58).
After 90 days of treatment, all signs of sun damage had improved, and brittleness of hair and
nails was normalized in all cases. These clinical observations were confirmed by changes in skin
Oral Cosmetics
681

=== Page 699 ===
thickness and elasticity; however, the obtained results may have been biased by seasonal
changes since a control group was missing in the study. In a second double-blind, placebo-
controlled study, 30 females of the same age range and with similar signs of sun damage were
treated with 0.5 g/day glycosaminoglycans derivatives or placebo for 90 days. The results in the
glycosaminoglycan-treated group corresponded to those in the first study, whereas no response
to treatment was observed in the placebo treatment group (58). Kieffer et al. showed that after
three months of treatment with glycosaminoglycans derivatives (Imedeen) there was no
significant improvement in photoaging of the skin compared with placebo or baseline. The study
was continued for another nine months in an open design i.e., without the use of a control group.
After one year of treatment, a significant improvement was found compared with baseline in the
investigator’s evaluation of fine lines and overall photoaging, and, respectively, in density
measurements by ultrasound, transepidermal water loss, and skin smoothness (59).
Eskelinen and Santalahti (60) studied the effect of oral intake of natural cartilage
polysaccharides (Vivida1, Helsinki, Finland) on sun-damaged skin in 15 women aged 40 to
60 years. After 90 days of treatment, significant improvements compared with baseline were
found in the active group, respectively, for the clinical evaluation of skin condition (e.g.,
dryness, thinning, and wrinkles), epidermal and dermal thickness by ultrasound, and the
erythemal index, whereas no changes were observed in the placebo group.
Choline-stabilized Orthosilicic Acid
Choline-stabilized orthosilicic acid (ch-OSA) is a specific complex with high bioavailability
(61), and the effect of ch-OSA on connective tissue (e.g., bone and skin) was evaluated in
animal studies and in placebo-controlled clinical studies. Ch-OSA is a specific concentrated
form of orthosilicic acid with choline as stabilizing agent. Physiological concentrations of
orthosilicic acid were found to stimulate collagen type I synthesis in skin fibroblasts in vitro
(62). Choline is a precursor of phospholipids such as phosphatidyl choline, which is an
essential component of cellular membranes.
Supplementation of young animals with low doses of ch-OSA resulted in a significant
higher hydroxyproline content in the dermis (63) and increased femoral density (64,65). Oral
intake of ch-OSA for 20 weeks in 50 women with photoaged skin resulted in a significant
positive effect on skin microrelief and skin mechanical properties compared with that in
placebo group, suggesting a regeneration or de novo synthesis of collagen fibers in the dermis.
Assessment of hair and nail brittleness on a visual analogue scale indicated a significant
improvement in the ch-OSA group, whereas no change was observed in the placebo
group (66).
The effect of ch-OSA on hair was further investigated in a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study in 48 women with fine hair. Hair morphology and tensile properties
were evaluated before and after treatment with validated methods. Oral intake of ch-OSA had
a positive effect on tensile strength, including elasticity and break load, and resulted in thicker
hair (67). The authors suggested that the observed increase in cross-sectional area of the hair
shaft after ch-OSA supplementation may be explained by a stimulation of the collagen
synthesis by fibroblasts in the dermal papilla, which determine the volume of the hair follicle.
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
Common food sources of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) are cod liver oil, fish oil, and
marine animals with a high amount of fat, such as mackerel, salmon, and menhaden. A few
studies have assessed the photoprotective effects of dietary intakes of fish oil. Orengo et al. (68)
observed a small but statistically significant increase in the MED after intake of a fish oil–
enriched diet for four weeks, showing that a relatively low dose (2.8 g eicosapentaenoic acid
and 1.2 g docosahexaenoic acid) of fish oil is photoprotective. In another study (69), fish oil
consumption (10 g daily) was also found to reduce UV irradiation-induced erythema, but the
susceptibility of the skin to lipid peroxidation increased because of the unstable nature of n-3
fatty acids.
Dietary fatty acids were reported to be capable of changing the fatty acid composition of
membrane phospholipids of immune cells, which may modulate the function of these cells. A
few studies are published, which evaluate the effect of PUFAs in delayed-type hypersensitivity
(DTH) skin tests using a panel of antigens, which have generally been accepted as an important
682
Demeester et al.

=== Page 700 ===
means to monitor the cell-mediated immunity in vivo. However, variable results were obtained
in these studies with respect to the effect on DTH skin reactivity, which illustrates that more
research is needed to document the immunomodulating activity of PUFAs (70–72).
The most important benefit of oral n-3 PUFA intakes from fish oil may be ascribed to their
anti-inflammatory effects. These effects of n-3 PUFAs have been reported to be the result of their
competition with n-6 PUFAs as a substrate for cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase, resulting in the
formation of less-active prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Interference with inflammatory
cascades in the skin may occur through reductions in the synthesis of pro-inflammatory lipid
mediators or through reductions in the production of cytokines. Moreover, n-3 PUFAs are
unstable and may preferably be damaged by free radicals, thereby protecting other structures
from attack by free radicals. Nevertheless, to protect the skin against excessive formation of free
radicals and lipid peroxidation, appropriate amounts of antioxidants should also be consumed.
Multicomponent Supplements
Murad and Tabibian conducted a randomized, single-blind study in 72 women to evaluate the
effect on skin roughness of a five-week supplementation with a combination of glucosamine,
amino acids, minerals, and various antioxidant compounds. Women without supplementation
were used as a control group, i.e., placebo supplementation was missing in this study. A
statistically significant reduction in the number of visible wrinkles and fine lines was observed
in the active group but not in the control group. There was no significant change in epidermal
hydration in either the control or the active study group (73).
Skovgaard et al. investigated in a placebo-controlled study the effects of a novel dietary
supplement (Imedeen Prime Renewal1, Soeberg, Denmark) on skin in hundred postmenopausal
women. The supplement contained soy extract, fish protein polysaccharides, white tea extracts,
grape seed and tomato extract, vitamins C and E, as well as zinc and chamomile extract. The clinical
grading of skin condition and the density of the skin measured by ultrasound structure improved
after six months of supplementation in the active group but not in the placebo group (74).
The effect of oral intake of a combination of marine proteins with zinc, copper, vitamins
C, E, B3 and B5, a lipoic acid, pine bark extract, red clover extract, tomato extract, and soya
extract (DermaVite1, Florida, U.S.A.), respectively, was tested in a placebo-controlled study in
40 women with aged skin (75). There was a significant increase in skin thickness and elasticity
after six months of supplementation with the active preparation but not in the placebo group.
A significant improvement in global evaluation of skin condition using a visual analogue scale
was also observed in the active group after six months of supplementation, whereas no change
was observed in the placebo group.
Sixty-two women aged 45 to 73 years participated in a double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial to evaluate the efficacy of a proprietary combination of vitamins C and E, carotenoids,
selenium, zinc, amino acids, glycosaminoglycans, blueberry extract, and Pycnogenol (see
description in this chapter in the sect.“Polyphenolic Compounds”), respectively. Compared
with that of placebo, it was found that skin elasticity and skin roughness improved
significantly after 6 and 12 weeks of supplementation (8).
LEGISLATION CONCERNING ORAL COSMETICS
Oral cosmetics are dietary supplements (food supplements), i.e., the legislation on food
supplements should be followed. Considerable differences in such legislation exist between
different countries with respect to the maximal doses, the chemical forms of vitamins and
minerals, plant species, and product claims, which are allowed to be used in and for dietary
supplements. In the European Community, the legislation on both food supplements and
health claims was recently harmonized for its member states when the European Commission
(EC) Directive on Food supplements (i.e., Directive 2002/46/EC) and the Regulation on
Nutrition and Health Claims (i.e., Regulation 1924/2006) came into force.
CONCLUSION
Sun avoidance and the use of sunscreens are well established as primary components in
antiaging regimens, although these are still underappreciated by many people. Clearly, sun
Oral Cosmetics
683

=== Page 701 ===
avoidance is not easy to manage and is often impossible. Consumer-driven demand has led to
the development of products to counteract the signs of aging skin. Functional foods positioned
as beauty enhancers are a recent concept in Western countries. Bearing this in mind, the
development of novel or more active cosmetics (cosmeceuticals) or dietary supplements,
which specifically target the skin, hair, and nails (oral cosmetics) is one of the most exciting
and promising ways in which the future of cosmetology and dietetics may address human
health needs and well-being (76). Considerable research and firsthand experience of physicians
have shown that using topical creams in conjunction with dietary supplements leads to
superior results compared with using either skin care or supplements alone. It may come as a
surprise to many consumers that only few ingredients in topical skin care products have the
capacity to penetrate far enough into the dermis to ameliorate deep wrinkles. Therefore, using
a combination of topical and oral cosmetics will likely be the favored recommendation in the
near future to develop efficient antiaging therapies.
REFERENCES
1. Miller SJ. Nutritional deficiency and the skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1989; 21(1):1–30.
2. Heath ML, Sidbury R. Cutaneous manifestations of nutritional deficiency. Curr Opin Pediatr 2006;
18(4):417–422.
3. Boelsma E, Hendriks HFJ, Roza L. Nutritional skin care: health effects of micronutrients and fatty
acids. Am J Clin Nutr 2001; 73:853–864.
4. Boelsma E, van de Vijver LP, Goldbohm RA, et al. Human skin condition and its associations with
nutrient concentrations in serum and diet. Am J Clin Nutr 2003; 77:348–355.
5. Cosgrove MC, Franco OH, Granger SP, et al. Dietary nutrient intakes and skin-aging appearance
among middle-aged American women. Am J Clin Nutr 2007; 86(4):1225–1231.
6. The Federal Drug and Cosmetic Act; FD&C Act, sec. 201(i).
7. Lupo MP, Cole AL. Cosmeceutical peptides. Dermatol Ther 2007; 20:343–349.
8. Segger D, Scho¨nlau F. Supplementation with Evelle improves skin smoothness and elasticity in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled study with 62 women. J Dermatol Treatm 2004; 15:222–226.
9. Farage MA, Miller KW. Structural characteristics of the aging skin: a review. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 2007;
26:343–357.
10. Gilchrest BA. A review of skin ageing and its medical therapy. Br J Dermatol 1996; 135:867–875.
11. Baumann L. Skin ageing and its treatment. J Pathol 2007; 211:241–251.
12. Mehta RC, Fitzpatrick RE. Endogenous growth factors as cosmeceuticals. Dermatol Ther 2007;
20(5):350–359.
13. Kennedy C, Bastiaens MT, Bajdik C, et al. Effect of smoking and sun on the aging skin. J Invest
Dermatol 2003; 120:548–554.
14. Andrew W, Behnke RH, Sato T. Changes with advancing age in the cell population of human dermis.
Gerontologia 1964–1965; 10):1–19.
15. Branchet MC, Boisnic S, Francis C, et al. Skin thickness changes in normal aging skin. Gerontology
1990; 36:28–35.
16. Warren R, Gartstein V, Kligman AM, et al. Age, sunlight, and facial skin: a histologic and quantitative
study. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991; 25:751–760.
17. Ramos-e-Silva M, Coelho da Silva, Carneiro S. Elderly skin and its rejuvenation: products and
procedures for the aging skin. J Cosm Dermatol 2007; 6:40–50.
18. Halliwell B. Oxidative stress, nutrition and health. Experimental strategies for optimization of
nutritional antioxidant intake in humans. Free Radical Res 1996; 25:57–74.
19. Berneburg M, Plettenberg H, Krutmann J. Photoaging of human skin. Photodermatol Photoimmunol
Photomed 2000; 16:239–244.
20. Trautinger F. Mechanisms of photodamage of the skin and its functional consequences for skin
ageing. Clin Exp Dermatol 2001; 26:573–577.
21. Sander CS, Chang H, Salzmann S, et al. Photoaging is associated with protein oxidation in human skin
in vivo. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 118:618–625.
22. Sies H, Cadenas E. Oxidative stress: damage to intact cells and organs. Philos Trans R Soc Lon B Biol
Sci 1985; 311:617–631.
23. Streilein JW. Skin-associated lymphoid tissues (SALT): origins and functions. J Invest Dermatol 1983;
80:12S–16S.
24. Greul AK, Grundmann JU, Heinrich F, et al. Photoprotection of UV-irradiated human skin/an
antioxidative combination of vitamins E and C, carotenoids, selenium and proanthocyanidins. Skin
Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15(5):307–315.
684
Demeester et al.

=== Page 702 ===
25. La Ruche G, Ce´sarini JP. Protective effects of oral selenium plus copper associated with vitamin
complex on sunburn cell formation in human skin. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 1991;
8:232–235.
26. Ce´sarini JP, Michel L, Maurette JM, et al. Immediate effects of UV radiation on the skin: modification
by an antioxidant complex containing carotenoids. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2003;
19:182–189.
27. Fuchs J, Kern H. Modulation of UV-light induced skin inflammation by D-alpha-tocopherol and
L-ascorbic acid: a clinical study using solar simulated radiation. Free Radic Biol Med 1998; 25:1006–1012.
28. Stahl W, Heinrich U, Jungmann H, et al. Carotenoids and carotenoids plus vitamin E protect against
ultraviolet light induced erythema in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 2000; 71:795–798.
29. Lee J, Jiang SG, Levine N, et al. Carotenoid supplementation reduces erythema in human skin after
simulated solar radiation exposure. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 2000; 223:170–174.
30. Stahl W, Sies H. Carotenoids and flavonoids contribute to nutritional protection against skin damage
from sunlight. Mol Biotechnol 2007; 37(1):26–30.
31. Davidson JM, LuValle PA, Zoia O, et al. Ascorbate differentially regulates elastin and collagen
biosynthesis in vascular smooth muscle cells and skin fibroblasts by pretranslational mechanisms. J
Biol Chem 1997; 272(1):345–352.
32. Vaxman F, Olender S, Lambert A, et al. Effect of pantothenic acid and ascorbic acid supplementation
on human skin wound healing process. A double-blind, prospective and randomized trial. Eur Surg
Res 1995; 27:158–166.
33. Vaxman F, Olender S, Lambert A, et al. Can the wound healing process be improved by vitamin
supplementation? Experimental study on humans. Eur Surg Res 1996; 28:306–314.
34. Mock DM. Skin manifestations of biotin deficiency. Semin Dermatol 1991; 10(4):296–302.
35. Colombo VE, Gerber F, Bronhofer M, et al. Treatment of brittle fingernails and onychoschizia with
biotin: scanning electron microscopy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990; 23:1127–1132.
36. Prasad AS. Zinc: mechanisms of host defense. J Nutr 2007a; 137(5):1345–1349.
37. Prasad AS. Clinical, immunological, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant roles of zinc. Exp Gerontol
2008; 43(5):370–377.
38. Rostan EF, DeBuys HV, Madey DL, et al. Evidence supporting zinc as an important antioxidant for
skin. Int J Dermatol 2002; 41(9):606–611.
39. Ead RD. Oral zinc sulphate in alopecia areata—a double blind trial. Br J Dermatol 1981; 104:483–484.
40. Arnaud J, Beani JC, Favier AE, et al. Zinc status in patients with telogen defluvium. Acta Derm
Venereol 1995; 75:248–249.
41. Traynor NJ, McKenzie RC, Beckett GJ et al. Selenomethionine inhibits ultraviolet radiation-induced
p53 transactivation. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2006; 22(6):297–303.
42. Heinrich U, Tronnier H, Stahl W. Antioxidant supplements improve parameters related to skin
structure in humans. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2006; 19:224–231.
43. Lassus.Colloidal silicic acid for oral and topical treatment of aged skin, fragile hair and brittle nails in
females. J Int Med Res 1993; 21:209–215.
44. Reffitt DM, Jugdaosingh R, Thompson RPH, et al. Silicic acid: its gastrointestinal uptake and urinary
excretion in man and effects on aluminium excretion. J Inorg Biochem 1999; 76:141–147.
45. Cos P, Hermans N, Calomme M, et al. Comparative study of eight well-known polyphenolic
antioxidants. J Pharm Pharmacol 2003; 55:1291–1297.
46. Cos P, Ying L, Calomme M, et al. Structure-activity relationship and classification of flavonoids as
inhibitors of xanthine oxidase and superoxide scavengers. J Nat Prod 1998; 61:71–76.
47. Katiyar SK. Silymarin and skin cancer prevention: anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant and immunomo-
dulatory effects. Int J Oncol 2005; 26:169–176.
48. Cos P, De Bruyne T, Hermans N, et al. Proanthocyanidins in health care: current and new trends. Curr
Med Chem 2004; 11:1345–1359.
49. Cos P, Rajan P, Vedernikova I, et al. In vitro antioxidant profile of phenolic acid derivatives. Free Rad
Res 2002; 36:711–716.
50. Baumann L. How to prevent photoaging? J Invest Dermatol 2005; 125:xii–xiii.
51. Cho HS, Lee MH, Lee JW, et al. Anti-wrinkling effects of the mixture of vitamin C, vitamin E,
pycnogenol and evening primrose oil, and molecular mechanisms on hairless mouse skin caused by
chronic ultraviolet B irradiation. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2007; 23(5):155–162.
52. Cos P, De Bruyne T, Apers S, et al. Phytoestrogens: recent developments. Planta Med 2003; 69:589–599.
53. Izumi T, Saito M, Obata A, et al. Oral intake of soy isoflavone aglycone improves the aged skin of
adult women. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo) 2007; 53(1):57–62.
54. Pie´rard-Franchimont C, Cornil F, Dehavay J. Climacteric skin ageing of the face—a prospective
longitudinal comparative trial on the effect of oral hormone replacement therapy. Maturitas 1999;
32:87–93.
55. Sator P-G, Schmidt JB, Sator MO, et al. The influence of hormone replacement therapy on skin
ageing—A pilot study. Maturitas 2001; 39:43–55.
Oral Cosmetics
685

=== Page 703 ===
56. Corrao G, Zambon A, Conti V, et al. Menopause hormone replacement therapy and cancer risk: an
Italian record linkage investigation. Ann Oncol 2008; 19:150–155.
57. Zhou B, Sun Q, Cong R, et al. Hormone replacement therapy and ovarian cancer risk: a meta-analysis.
Gynecol Oncol 2008; 108:641–651.
58. Lassus A, Jeskanen L, Happonen HP, et al. Imedeen for the treatment of degenerated skin in females.
J Int Med Res 1991; 19(2):147–152.
59. Kieffer ME, Efsen J. Imedeen in the treatment of photoaged skin: an efficacy and safety trial over
12 months. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 1998; 11(2):129–136.
60. Eskelinen A, Santalahti J. Special natural cartilage polysaccharides for the treatment of sun-damaged
skin in females. J Int Med Res 1992; 20:99–105.
61. Calomme M, Cos P, D’Haese P, et al. Silicon absorption from stabilized orthosilicic acid and other
supplements in healthy subjects. In: Roussel AMet al., eds. Trace Elements in Man and Animals. vol. 10.
New York: Plenum, 2000:1111–1114.
62. Reffitt DM, Ogston N, Jugdaohsingh R, et al. Orthosilicic acid stimulates collagen type 1 synthesis and
osteoblastic differentiation in human osteoblast-like cells in vitro. Bone 2003; 32:127–135.
63. Calomme MR, Vanden Berghe DA. Supplementation of calves with stabilized orthosilicic acid. Biol
Trace Elem Res 1997; 56:153–165.
64. Calomme M, Wijnen P, Sindambiwe JB, et al. Effect of choline stabilized orthosilicic acid on bone
density in chicks. Calcif Tissue Int 2002; 70:292.
65. Calomme M, Geusens P, Demeester N, et al. Partial prevention of long-term femoral bone loss in aged
ovariectomized rats supplemented with choline-stabilized orthosilicic acid. Calcif Tissue Int 2006;
78:227–232.
66. Barel A, Calomme M, Timchenko A, et al. Effect of oral intake of choline-stabilized orthosilicic acid on
skin, nails and hair in women with photodamaged skin. Arch Dermatol Res 2005; 297:147–153.
67. Wickett RR, Kossmann E, Barel A, et al. Effect of choline-stabilized orthosilicic acid on hair tensile
strength and morphology in women with fine hair. Arch Dermatol Res 2007; 299:499–505.
68. Orengo IF, Black HS, Wolf JE. Influence of fish oil supplementation on the minimal erythema dose in
humans. Arch Dermatol Res 1992; 284:219–221.
69. Rhodes LE, O’Farrell S, Jackson MJ, et al. Dietary fish oil supplementation in humans reduces UVB-
erythemal sensitivity but increases epidermal lipid peroxidation. J Invest Dermatol 1994; 103:151–154.
70. Kelley DS, Branch LB, Love JE, et al. Dietary alpha-linolenic acid and immunocompetence in humans.
Am J Clin Nutr 1991; 53:40–46.
71. Kelley DS, Nelson GJ, Branch LB, et al. Salmon diet and human immune status. Eur J Clin Nutr 1991;
46:397–404.
72. Wu D, Meydani M, Leka LS. Effect of dietary supplementation with black currant seed oil on the
immune response of healthy elderly subjects. Am J Clin Nutr 1999; 70:536–543.
73. Murad H, Tabibian MP. The effect of an oral supplement containing glucosamine, amino acids,
minerals, and antioxidants on cutaneous aging: a preliminary study. J Dermatol Treatm 2001; 12:47–51.
74. Skovgaard LGR, Jensen AS, Sigler ML. Effect of a novel dietary supplement on skin aging in post-
menopausal women. Eur J Clin Nutr 2006; 60:1201–1206.
75. Thom E. A rondomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study on the clinical efficacy of oral
treatment with DermaVite1 on ageing symptoms of the skin. J Intern Med Res 2005; 33:267–272.
76. Choi CM, Berson DS. Cosmeceuticals. Semin Cutan Med Surg 2006; 25:163–168.
686
Demeester et al.

=== Page 704 ===
67
Hair Conditioners
Charles Reich, Dean Su, Cheryl Kozubal, and Zhi Lu
Colgate-Palmolive Technical Center, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Despite myriad claimed benefits, the primary purpose of a hair conditioner is to reduce the
magnitude of the forces associated with combing or brushing of the hair (1), especially when
wet (2,3). This is generally accomplished by the deposition of conditioning agents that lubricate
the hair fiber, diminishing surface friction and, therefore, combing forces (4).
In general, deposition of a conditioning agent also causes the hair to feel softer and more
moisturized. Another secondary benefit is the reduction or prevention of flyaway hair (5),
especially by cationic conditioners (6). Besides making the hair more manageable, increasing
the ease of combing also improves the ability to align the hair fibers in a more parallel
configuration, which can result in an increase in hair shine, even if the shine of the individual
fibers is not increased (7). Some ingredients can also form a film on the hair surface that
provides color retention benefits for color-treated hair (8).
A number of other benefits have sometimes been claimed or implied for conditioners,
including repair of damaged hair, strengthening of hair, repair of split ends, vitamin
therapy, etc. Some of these are marketing hype or are based on laboratory conditions or
concentrations not found under actual usage conditions. In this chapter, we will confine
ourselves to a discussion of only the observable conditioner benefits presented above.
The chapter will begin with a discussion of the relationship between hair damage,
conditioning, and the state of the hair surface. This will be followed by a discussion of the
major classes of conditioning agents currently in use. Finally, we will end with a brief
discussion of the auxiliary ingredients necessary for the production of a commercial
conditioning product.
CONDITIONING AND THE HAIR FIBER SURFACE
Hair Damage
In previous chapters, it has been shown that hair fibers consist of a central cortex that
comprises the major portion of the fiber, surrounded by 8 to 10 layers of overlapping cells
termed “cuticle.” The cortex is responsible for the tensile properties of the hair (9,10), while the
state of the cuticle affects a variety of consumer-perceivable properties including hair feel,
shine, combability, etc.
A major function of conditioners is to protect the hair’s structural elements, especially the
cuticle, from grooming damage. This type of stress, characterized by chipping, fragmenting,
and wearing away of cuticle cells, is probably the single most important source of damage to
the hair surface (11–13).
A rather extreme example of combing damage can be seen in Figure 1, which shows the
results of an experiment in which a tress of virgin hair was washed with a cleaning shampoo
and then combed 700 times while wet. Since hair is more fragile when wet (3) and combing
forces are higher (2), combing under these conditions insures maximum damage. It can be seen
that damage to the cuticle was extensive with many cuticle cells lifted from the surface, while
others were completely torn away by the combing process.
The ability of conditioning agents to protect the hair from the above type of damage can
be seen in Figure 2, which shows the results of an experiment in which a tress was washed
with a high-conditioning 2-in-1 shampoo and then combed 700 times while wet. In this case,
because the conditioning agents in the shampoo reduced combing forces, the hair surface is
seen to be intact with evidence of only minor chipping and fragmenting of cuticle cells. This

=== Page 705 ===
Figure 2
Typical SEM photo of hair taken from a tress washed with a high conditioning 2-in-1 shampoo and then
combed 700 times while wet. Note the minimal damage compared with that in Figure 1. Abbreviation: SEM,
scanning electron micrograph.
Figure 1
Typical SEM of hair taken from a tress washed with a cleaning shampoo and then combed 700 times
while wet. Note raised and chipped cuticle cells and areas where cells have been completely torn away.
Abbreviation: SEM, scanning electron micrograph.
688
Reich et al.

=== Page 706 ===
demonstrates the important role conditioners can play in maintaining the integrity of the
hair fiber.
Heat produced by the use of appliances can also cause hair damage. Many styles require
the use of blow dryers and/or curling irons, which can produce temperatures of 2008F to 4008F
(14). Steam can be released from the hair fiber causing bubbling and buckling of the cuticles,
especially if the hair is not completely dry while being curled. In addition to minimizing
combing forces, to protect the hair from this type of damage, certain conditioning polymers can
provide added protection in the presence of heat, resulting in increased characteristic life of the
hair fiber (15).
Hair Damage and the Cuticle Surface
The susceptibility of a hair fiber to grooming damage and the type of conditioner most
effective in preventing this damage is affected to a large degree by the nature and state
of the hair surface. It is therefore helpful to precede a discussion of conditioning agents
with a presentation on the hair surface and how it affects conditioner requirements and
deposition.
Virgin Hair Surfaces
Hair that has not been chemically treated is termed “virgin hair.” The cuticle surface of virgin
hair in good condition is hydrophobic (16,17), in large part, as a result of a layer of fatty acids
covalently bound to the outermost surface of the cuticle (epicuticle) (18,19). As a result of its
protein structure, however, the hair surface has an isoelectric point near 3.67 (20), which
insures that the surface will contain negatively charged hydrophilic sites at the ordinary pH
levels of hair care products. This mix of hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity affects, of course,
the types of conditioning agents that will bind to the virgin hair surface.
The situation is further complicated by the fact that the negative charge density
on virgin hair increases from root to tip. This is primarily a result of oxidation of cystine in
the hair to cystine S-sulfonate and cysteic acid as a result of exposure to ultraviolet (UV)
radiation in sunlight (21,22). The tip portions of the hair, being older than the root portions,
will have been exposed to damaging (11) UV radiation for a longer period of time and
will therefore be more hydrophilic, again affecting the nature of species that can bind to
these sites.
In addition to greater UV damage, the tips of hair are also subject to greater combing
damage. One reason for this damage is simply that, being older, the tip portions will have been
exposed to more combing. In addition, the surface friction of hair tips is higher (C. Reich,
unpublished data) so that combing forces increase as one moves from root to tip. Finally, the
ends of hair are subject to unusually high combing stress as a result of entangling during the
combing process (2). This eventually results in destruction of the covalently bound lipid layer
and a feeling of dryness at the tips. Because of this damage, the tip ends of hair require more
conditioning than the rest of the fiber. Without sufficient conditioning, the cuticle layer is
eventually lost, resulting in a split end. An example is seen in Figure 3, which clearly shows the
exposed cortical cells.
Chemically Treated Hair Surfaces
Chemical treatments, such as perming, bleaching, and permanent dyeing, can all cause
significant damage to the hair fiber (3,11,23–25). In addition to causing tensile damage, all
these treatments, which include oxidative steps, modify the surface of the hair, introducing
negative charges as a result of oxidation of cystine to cysteic acid (3,11,23,24,26). This can
result in transformation of the entire fiber surface from a hydrophobic to hydrophilic
character.
All of the above treatments also increase surface friction considerably (3,4,27,28),
resulting in a significant increase in combing forces. The result is that the hair feels rough and
dry and is subject to extensive grooming damage. Because of this damage, treated hair
generally requires more conditioning than virgin hair. By using a conditioner, one can prolong
the health of the hair fiber. It has been found that cuticle cells on damaged, chemically
processed hair are in better condition when a conditioner is used as part of the grooming
Hair Conditioners
689

=== Page 707 ===
process (29). Therefore, using a conditioner is particularly meaningful in improving the
condition and health of chemically processed hair fibers.
COMMERCIAL CONDITIONERS
The commercial hair conditioners produced to deal with the above problems have appeared in
almost every conceivable form, including thick Vaseline pomades, creams, gels, mousses,
lotions, and spray mists.
Categorizing by application method, conditioners have been marketed as regular rinse-
off conditioners, intensive treatment conditioners, and leave-in products. The first, regular
rinse-off conditioners are normally applied after shampoo, followed by a rinsing step. This is
the most common form of conditioner sold.
Intensive treatment conditioners are used similarly to the above products, but are not
meant for daily application. They are used, instead, for intensive treatment and a higher degree
of conditioning. These products generally contain a higher level of active ingredients that are
kept on the hair for a longer period of time prior to rinsing. Intensive conditioners are typically
sold as thicker creams to provide the perception of higher conditioning.
Leave-in products usually are lighter and can potentially provide more significant
benefits than the above rinse-off products since everything applied stays on the hair until the
next shampoo. Leave-in conditioners come in various forms, such as detanglers, leave-in
lotions, and sprays. They are marketed either for single application or multiple applications
during the day.
Despite the wide variety of forms available, most commercial conditioners are oil-in-
water emulsions in lotion form, having viscosities somewhere between 3000 and 12,000
centipoises. In addition, despite the different forms and positioning, most commercial
conditioners contain the same general classes of conditioning agents with differences mainly
in concentrations, numbers of different agents, and particular members of a conditioning
class employed.
The major classes of conditioning agents used in commercial products are surveyed in
the following sections. Example formulae taken from the patent literature are listed below for
some of the various forms of conditioning products.
Figure 3
SEM photo of a split end. Note the exposed cortex and the complete loss of cuticle cells on the fiber
surface. Abbreviation: SEM, scanning electron micrograph.
690
Reich et al.

=== Page 708 ===
Deep hair conditioner (31)
Ingredients
Weight (%)
Water
q.s. to 100
Cetyl alcohol
6.00
Stearamidopropyl dimethylamine
1.50
Mineral oil, heavy
0.50
Propylene glycol
1.00
Distearyl dimonium chloride
1.00
Citric acid
0.20
Germaben II (preservative)
0.50
Fragrance
0.40
Conditioning spray (32)
Ingredients
Weight (%)
Trimethylolpropane triisostearate
1.00
Methyl myristate
1.00
Cetyl alcohol
1.00
Monoalkyl trimethyl ammonium chloride
0.2
Preservative
0.1
Perfume
0.1
Denatured ethyl alcohol
q.s. to 100
Conditioning styling gel (33)
Ingredients
Weight (%)
Sodium PCA (50% aqueous solution)
2.00
Glycerin
1.50
Hydrolyzed collagen
0.50
Carbomer 940
0.35
SD alcohol 40
25.00
Nonionic surfactant
0.50
Fragrance
0.10
Water
q.s. to 100
Hair conditioner (30)
Ingredients
Weight (%)
Water
q.s. to 100
Stearyl alcohol
2.50
Stearamidopropyl dimethylamine
1.00
Mineral oil
0.50
Cyclomethicone
0.25
Propylene glycol
0.50
Distearyl dimonium chloride
0.75
Hydroxyethylcellulose
1.00
Citric acid
0.20
Polyvinylpyrrolidone
0.10
Formalin (preservative)
0.10
Fragrance
0.20
Hair Conditioners
691

=== Page 709 ===
KEY INGREDIENTS OF HAIR CONDITIONERS
Cationic Surfactants
Cationic surfactants in the form of quaternary ammonium compounds (quats) are the most
widely used conditioning agents in commercial products (34–36). Among the reasons for this
popularity are their effectiveness, versatility, availability, and low cost.
Important examples of these quats include stearalkonium chloride, cetrimonium
chloride, and dicetyldimonium chloride. Different counter anions, such as chloride, bromide,
and methosulfate, have been used with these materials.
Because of the positive charge on the quats such as the ones described above, they are
substantive to hair and bind to negative sites on the hair surface. Treatment with these quats
results, therefore, in a hydrophobic coating on the fiber that render the hair softer and easier to
comb (37). Buildup of static charge (flyaway) is also greatly reduced as a result of this surface
modification (6).
Another consequence of the positive charge on quats is that deposition increases with
increasing negative charge on the hair surface. This is seen in Table 1, which shows the results
of an experiment in which hair tresses were treated with 1% stearalkonium chloride and then
rinsed. Compared with the roots, 22% more quat was found to bind to the tips of virgin hair,
while deposition of stearalkonium chloride on bleached hair was found to be more than twice
that on untreated fibers.
This result is important since, as was discussed above, damaged portions of the hair, which
generally carry a greater amount of negative charge from either environmental damage or
chemical treatment, require a greater amount of conditioning. The fact that cationic surfactants
can supply this increased conditioning makes them effective on a wide variety of hair surfaces.
This is a major factor in the widespread use of these types of conditioning agents.
Research conducted at TRI/Princeton has shown that the type of deposition and degree of
penetration into the hair fiber depends on the size or molecular weight of the compound. The
interaction between cationic conditioners and the hair fiber mainly occurs at the surface;
however, low–molecular weight materials may penetrate the interior via intercellular diffusion.
Cetrimonium bromide (CETAB), e.g., can penetrate the cuticular sheath as well as cortex (39).
Conditioner Properties and Hydrophobicity
Many important properties of quaternary ammonium conditioners are related to the degree of
hydrophobicity of the lipophilic portion of the surfactant. Thus, increasing the length of the
Table 1
Binding of Stearalkonium Chloride to Human Haira
Type of hair
Quat deposition at roots
(mg/g hair)
Quat deposition at tips
(mg/g hair)
Virgin hair
0.649
0.789
Bleached hair
1.62
1.83
aData taken from Ref. 38.
692
Reich et al.

=== Page 710 ===
alkyl chain of a monoalkyl quat and, therefore, making it more hydrophobic leads to increased
deposition (40–45) on hair. Cetrimonium chloride, as a result, deposits on hair to a greater
extent than laurtrimonium chloride. Increasing the number of alkyl chains also increases the
deposition so that tricetylmonium chloride exhibits greater deposition than dicetyldimonium
chloride, which, in turn, is more substantive than the monocetyl quat.
This dependence of deposition on degree of hydrophobicity indicates that van der Waals
forces play an important role in deposition of quaternary ammonium conditioners (45). This
conclusion is consistent with the entropy-driven deposition demonstrated by Ohbu et al. (46)
and Stapleton (47) for a monoalkyl quat and a protonated long-chain amine.
Increased hydrophobicity also correlates with increased conditioning by quats (40–43,48).
Thus, cetrimonium chloride provides light to medium conditioning, while dicetyldimonium
and tricetylmonium chlorides provide heavier conditioning. Detangling and wet combing, in
particular, improve significantly from monocetyl to dicetyl to tricetyl quats; differences in dry
combing and static charge among these compounds are not as significant.
Increased conditioning with increased hydrophobicity is probably due to, in part, the
increased deposition of quat on hair. Data from Garcia and Diaz (49), however, indicate greater
improvements in wet combing from heavier conditioning quats even when present on the hair
in much lower amounts than less hydrophobic species. The degree of hydrophobicity of a quat
must, therefore, play a direct role in the conditioning efficacy of these compounds (37).
Note that on some types of hair, the greater substantivity of higher conditioning quats
can lead to buildup with repeated use and result in limp, unmanageable hair. This is especially
true, e.g., for untreated, fine hair. Different quats or mixtures of conditioning agents are,
therefore, suitable for different uses or different types of hair. A tricetyl quat might be used,
e.g., in an intensive conditioner meant only for occasional use.
The length and number of alkyl chains of quats also determines water solubility of these
compounds. Monoalkyl quaternaries up to cetrimonium chloride are water soluble, e.g.,
distearyldimonium chloride is water dispersible, while tricetylmonium chloride is insoluble in
water (43).
Compatibility with Anionics
The quaternium compounds normally used in commercial conditioners are not generally
found in shampoos because of its incompatibility with common anionic detergents (44).
Introducing hydrophilic groups into the quat can increase compatibility with anionics. An
example is the class of ethoxylated quaternaries, termed “ethoquats.” Typical members of this
class are polyethylene glycol (PEG)-2 cocomonium chloride, where x + y equal 2 and R is a
C12 alkyl chain, and PEG-15 stearmonium chloride, where x + y equal 15 and R is a C18
chain.
Both of these quats are compatible with typical anionic detergents. As would be expected
from the above discussion, however, introducing hydrophilic groups decreases the conditioning
efficacy of these materials (40,43). They are, therefore, suitable only in light conditioning
formulations. Furthermore, conditioning shampoos based on ethoquats would not be expected
to be very effective as a result of low deposition of the detergent-soluble ethoquat complex.
Other detergent-soluble quats have been produced. These include alkylamidopropyl
dihydroxypropyl dimonium chlorides (50), lauryl methyl gluceth-10 hydroxypropyl dimo-
nium chloride (51), and even a hydrolyzed ginseng-saponin quaternary derived from Korean
ginseng saponin (52). Although certain advantages have been claimed for these surfactants,
particularly low irritation, they all suffer from much the same conditioning limitations as the
ethoquats.
Hair Conditioners
693

=== Page 711 ===
Other Cationic Surfactants
In addition to the above examples, numerous other cationic surfactants are in use or have been
proposed for commercial products. One example of a compound that has been receiving
increasing use is the behentrimonium (C22) quat. This quat exhibits significantly reduced eye and
skin irritation compared with the corresponding C18 conditioner due to the longer fatty chain
length. In addition, superior conditioning and thickening properties have been claimed (53).
Another interesting example is hydrogenated tallow octyl dimonium chloride (54). This
material is quite substantive and provides high conditioning as a result of its two hydrophobic
chains. Unlike conventional dialkyl quats, however, this particular conditioner is soluble in
water as a result of branching (2-ethylhexyl) in the octyl moiety. This solubility makes the
compound much easier to formulate into a commercial product.
Several patents (55–61) have disclosed immidazoline-based quats containing the
immidazoline ring and fatty chains. Some patents have claimed a softening effect on fabrics
or hair. Conditioner compositions using these types of quats have also been disclosed (62,63).
Concern for the environment has led to the synthesis of ester quats that exhibit
increased biodegradability and environmental safety. One such example is dipalmitoylethyl
hydroxyethylmonium methosulfate, an ester quat based on a partially hydrogenated palm
radical (64).
Other cationic surfactants used in conditioners include quats derived from guerbet
alcohols (48) (low to high conditioning depending on length of the main and side alkyl chains),
distearyldimonium chloride (high conditioning), and the quaternized ammonium compounds
of hydrolyzed milk protein, soy and wheat protein, and hydrolyzed keratin (varying conditioning
efficacy depending on alkyl chain length).
Amines
Amines with fatty chains, such as stearamidopropyl dimethylamine, can also be found in
many commercial conditioners. These types of materials become cationic after protonation at
the low pH normally employed in conditioning products and therefore act as both cationic
emulsifiers and conditioning agents. Neutralization is normally required to decrease the pH
and convert the neutral compounds to cationic. Different acids may have different effects on
the viscosity of the final product.
Lipophilic Conditioners
Quaternary ammonium surfactants in commercial products are almost never used alone.
Instead, they are employed in combination with long-chain fatty conditioners, especially
cetyl and stearyl alcohols (36). These fatty materials are added to boost the conditioning
effects of the quaternary compounds (51). In one study, e.g., addition of cetyl alcohol to
CETAB nearly doubled the observed reduction in wet combing forces on hair (65). In another
study, using a novel hydrodynamic technique, Fukuchi et al. (66) found that addition of cetyl
alcohol to a behentrimonium chloride formulation resulted in a significantly reduced surface
friction.
Several workers have studied combinations of cationic surfactants and fatty alcohols.
Under the right conditions, these mixtures have been found to form lamellar liquid crystal
mesophases and gel networks (67–71) that can greatly increase viscosity and, at the same time,
confer stability upon emulsions. As a result of reduced repulsion between cationic head groups
when long-chain alcohols are interposed, liquid crystal formation has been observed even at
low concentrations (70,71). The ready formation of these extended structures between quats
and cetyl and stearyl alcohols, along with the low cost, stability, and compatibility with
cosmetic ingredients of the latter are important reasons why these alcohols are so ubiquitous in
conditioning formulations.
Long-chain fatty compounds are generally solids at room temperature, requiring heating
to incorporate into a product. Care should be taken in manufacturing formulations so that
the cooling rate is not so rapid when it interferes with liquid crystal formation. In addition, it
has been claimed that improved freeze-thaw stability is conferred upon conditioners when
using certain combinations of ethoxylated branched-chain fatty alcohol ethers or esters as
stabilizers (72).
Other lipids found in commercial products include glycol distearate, triglycerides, fatty
esters, waxes of triglycerides, liquid paraffin, etc.
694
Reich et al.

=== Page 712 ===
Polymers
Cationic Polymers
There are numerous cationic polymers that provide conditioning benefits, especially
improved wet combing and reduced static charge. Important examples of these polymers
are polyquaternium-10, a quaternized hydroxyethylcellulose polymer; polyquaternium-7, a
copolymer of diallyldimethylammonium chloride and acrylamide; polyquaternium-11, a
copolymer of vinylpyrrolidone and dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate quaternized with
dimethyl sulfate; polyquaternium-16, a copolymer of vinylpyrrolidone and quaternized
vinylimidazole; and polyquaternium 6, a homopolymer of diallyldimethylammonium chloride.
By virtue of their cationic nature, the above polymers are substantive to hair. The
particular conditioning effectiveness of any these materials depends on the polymer structure.
In one set of studies, deposition on hair was found to be inversely proportional, roughly, to
cationic charge density (73,74). This has been explained by the observation that the higher the
charge density, the lower the weight of polymer needed to neutralize all of the negative charge
on the hair. Once deposited, however, multiple points of electrostatic attachment make these
polymers harder to remove, especially if charge density is high (38,75). Care must be taken,
therefore, in formulating conditioners containing these materials to avoid over-conditioning as
a result of buildup with continued use.
As with the preceding monofunctional cationics, deposition of polyquaterniums
increases on treated or damaged hair (38,75). Unlike common monofunctional quats, however,
the first four of the above polymers are compatible to varying degrees with anionic surfactants
(75–78). As a result, such polymers are used more often in shampoos than in stand-alone
conditioners, although they find some use in leave-in conditioners.
Polyquaternium-10 (PQ-10) and polyquaternium-7 (PQ-7) are two of the most frequently
used polymers in commercial shampoos. Both of these polymers form negatively charged
complexes (73, 75) with excess anionic surfactant, resulting in reduced deposition because of
repulsion by the negatively charged hair surface. The magnitude of this effect depends on the
particular anionic employed and anionic surfactant-polymer ratio. In all cases, however,
conditioning from shampoos is significantly less than from stand-alone conditioners.
Despite reduced deposition, Hannah (79) has reported that polyquaternium association
complexes formed with sodium lauryl sulfate resist removal from hair. Buildup and a heavy,
coated feel on the hair can therefore result from conditioning shampoos containing polyquats
unless they are carefully formulated.
In addition to providing conditioning benefits, some polyquaternium materials have been
shown to improve adhesion of the cuticle scales thereby increasing resistance to scale uplift
when the hair is stressed. The same effects were observed for at least one quat—CETAB (39).
Other Polymers
In recent studies, other polymeric materials, including amphiphilc polymers (80–82),
amphoteric polymers (83), block copolymers (84–86), graft polymers (87, 88), and dendrimers
(89), have been investigated for use as conditioning agents, stabilizers, and deposition agents.
In part probably because of cost, commercial products containing those novel polymers are
rare. However, these research activities may indicate a future trend toward the use of polymers
with more complicated structures in personal care applications.
Silicones
The use of silicones in hair care products has increased considerably in the past two decades,
although their first incorporation into commercial products dates back to the 1950s. Different
types of silicones find use as conditioning agents in a wide variety of products including
conditioners, shampoos, hair sprays, mousses, and gels (90). One of the most widely used
silicones is dimethicone, which is a polydimethylsiloxane. Other important silicones are
Hair Conditioners
695

=== Page 713 ===
dimethiconol, which is a dimethylsiloxane terminated with hydroxyl groups; dimethicone
copolyol, which is a dimethylsiloxane containing polyoxyethylene and/or polyoxypropylene side
chains; amodimethicone, which is an amino-substituted silicone, and silicone quats, which
contain permanently quaternized ammonium groups. In general, amodimethicones and silicone
quats condition better than dimethicones, which condition better then dimethicone copolyols (91).
Presumably this is due to differences in substantivity from rinse-off products. Because of the
increased substantivity, care should be taken with amodimethicones and silicone quats to make
sure they do not build up over time. Likewise, many dimethicone copolyols are soluble in water
and therefore may not be as effective in rinse-off products.
Many silicones used in hair care products are insoluble and must therefore be emulsified.
To increase ease of product manufacture, many suppliers offer silicones as preformed
emulsions in addition to the pure material. Emulsions can vary in charge (anionic, cationic, or
nonionic), size (microemulsion or macroemulsion), and how they are made (mechanical or
emulsion polymerization). The factors affecting deposition of silicones from such emulsions
have been reported by Jachowicz and Berthiaume (92,93) and by Hoag et al. (94).
Silicone emulsions can also vary in particle size. Typically, the smaller the size of the
silicone particles, the more stable the product emulsion is. Additionally, it has been claimed
that reducing the particle size also improves conditioning performance (95). If a preformed
silicone emulsion is not used, particle size of the silicone droplets can be controlled by
combining the correct amount of heat and shear when making the product.
Conditioning Properties of Silicones
Silicones used in hair care products possess a range of unique properties including lubricity,
low intermolecular forces, water insolubility, and low surface tension. These properties permit
the silicones to spread easily on the hair surface, thereby forming a hydrophobic film that
provides ease of combing and imparts a smooth, soft feel to the hair without greasiness.
The relative conditioning efficacy of silicones compared with other conditioners was
demonstrated by Yahagi (96), who found that dimethicone lowered frictional coefficients and
surface energy of virgin hair to a greater extent than a series of cationic surfactants, including
distearydimonium chloride, a very effective conditioning agent. Dimethicones with molecular
weights greater than 20,000 were found to be most effective in reducing surface tension.
Nanavati and Hami (97) measured conditioning on slightly bleached European hair
treated with dimethicone fluids and dimethiconol gums. Both types of silicones were found to
significantly reduce combing forces on hair. Ease of wet combing was roughly the same for the
two silicone treatments, while dimethiconol was found to be more effective in reducing dry
combing forces.
Interestingly, under the treatment conditions employed (exposure to silicone solutions
for 30 seconds followed by drying without rinsing), deposition of all silicones studied was
found to nearly double if tricetylmonium chloride was present in the treatment solution.
696
Reich et al.

=== Page 714 ===
Reduction in combing forces was also roughly doubled when silicones were deposited in the
presence of quat. This latter effect was found to be synergistic; i.e., it depended on deposition
of both silicone and quat, and its magnitude was greater than the sum of the individual
conditioner contributions.
Wendel et al. (98) used electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA) to demonstrate
that the presence of amino groups in silicones considerably increases substantivity of these
materials. This is a result of the positive charge developed by these groups at the pH commonly
found in commercial products.
Comparison of conditioning effects of a series of silicone emulsions on bleached and
virgin hair was carried out by Hoag et al. (94). Most of the silicones were dimethicones or
amodimethicones, while emulsions were anionic, neutral, or cationic in nature. Diluted
emulsions were applied directly to the hair and combing forces measured both before and after
rinsing. Prior to rinsing, reduction of combing forces by most emulsions was greater than 80%.
This number decreased after rinsing as a result of partial removal of deposited silicone.
Unsurprisingly, the least change in ease of combing was found for cationic emulsions,
especially those containing amodimethicone. Combing forces on virgin hair increased less than
on bleached hair after rinsing, indicating that the silicones were more substantive to this type of
hair. This is also unsurprising considering the hydrophobic nature of these conditioning agents.
Further effects of amodimethicones can be seen in work reported by Berthiaume et al. (99)
who studied a series of amodimethicone emulsions in a prototype conditioner formulation.
Deposition on hair from the conditioner was found to increase with increasing amine content
in the silicone. This increased deposition was found, in half-head tests, to correlate with
conditioning efficacy, including wet and dry combing, softness, and detangling. A microemulsion
in the test series that provided high conditioning was also shown to significantly reduce the
color fading caused by shampoo of temporarily dyed hair.
Other Silicones
One silicone that is widely used in conditioners to help improve wet combing is cyclomethicone,
which refers to a class of cyclic dimethyl polysiloxanes ranging from trimer to hexamer.
Cyclomethicone is volatile and will not remain on dry hair, especially after blow-drying. It helps
other conditioning agents to disperse, however, and form films on hair. It also helps improve
wet combing and provides transient shine. In addition, cyclomethicone is widely used as a
solvent to reduce the viscosity of silicone gums with much higher molecular weights.
Because of its high refractive index, close to that of hair, phenyl trimethicone is
commonly used in leave-in conditioners to enhance the shine of hair fibers. To improve
substantivity higher molecular weight versions (Si-Tec PTM 1000, and International Specialty
Products) and versions that incorporate amino groups (DC 2-2078 fluid, Dow Corning) have
been produced.
Newer silicones include dimethicone copolyol phosphates, which are anionic functional
silicones and fluorocarbon-modified organosilicones. The copolyol phosphates are able to
complex with tertiary amines of cationic hair conditioners and form effective emulsifiers and
conditioners (100). The fluorocarbon-modified silicones are very hydrophobic like dimethi-
cone; however, they are claimed to have a lighter and more lubricious feel (100).
Interesting block copolymers with silicone blocks and organic segments have been
developed for personal care applications (101). DC CE8401 from Dow Corning Co. is a
commercially available example. This material has a unique structure. In contrast to traditional
silicone copolyols that have a rake structure, it is a block copolymer containing silicone and
polyether segments in its backbone.
Other examples of silicones include blends of these materials, having different molecular
weights (102), different functional groups (103,104), and silicones with other hydrophobic oils
(105). Those silicone blends have been reported to improve overall conditioning benefits.
2-in-1 Shampoos
Silicones find important application as the primary conditioning agents in 2-in-1 conditioning
shampoos. On their introduction in the latter part of the 1980s, these shampoos represented a
major advance in hair care technology, providing a significantly higher degree of conditioning
Hair Conditioners
697

=== Page 715 ===
than was then the norm for conditioning shampoos and, at the same time, leaving a desirable
soft, smooth feel on the hair.
Conditioning from 2-in-1 shampoos is expected to occur primarily at the rinsing stage, when
the shampoo emulsion breaks, releasing the silicone for deposition on hair. This separation of
cleaning and conditioning stages permits the shampoo to perform both functions efficiently.
The conditioning agent used most frequently in 2-in-1 shampoos is dimethicone. This
silicone can provide good performance in shampoo formulations without excessive buildup on
the hair (106). With advances in technology, newer formulations are now employing easier-to-
process silicones, such as dimethicone emulsions, amodimethicones, dimethiconols, and
copolyols as well as combinations of these different types to deliver the desired level of
conditioning as well as improved product aesthetics.
The level of conditioning from 2-in-1 shampoos is lower than that from stand-alone
conditioners. This is especially true for treated hair since the greater the degree of negative
charge on the hair surface, the lower the substantivity of a hydrophobic material
like dimethicone. Many 2-in-1 products contain polyquats, which might be expected to increase
conditioning on damaged hair. In shampoos with high levels of anionic detergent, however,
polyquat performance on treated hair may be no better than dimethicone as a result of formation
of the negatively charged polymer complexes discussed in the section “Cationic Polymers.”
Yahagi (96) studied the performance of dimethicone, amodimethicone, and dimethicone
copolyols in 2-in-1 shampoos. Ease of combing was found to be similar for hair treated with
shampoos containing dimethicone or amodimethicone. Unsurprisingly, soluble dimethicone
copolyols did not perform well; insolubility, or at least dispersibility, was required for
adequate silicone deposition. In the latter case, dimethicone copolyols were found to provide a
somewhat lower level of conditioning than the other two silicones studied, especially once
blow-drying was begun. Yahagi also studied silicone effects on foam volume. In these studies,
dimethicone was found to significantly reduce foam volume in a model shampoo formulation,
while amodimethicone and dimethicone copolyol had a minimal effect on foam.
Auxiliary Ingredients
A number of ingredients, besides conditioning actives, are added to commercial conditioners
for functional, esthetic, and marketing purposes (107). These include fragrances, dyes,
preservatives, thickeners, emulsifying agents, pearlizers, herbal extracts, humectants, and
vitamins. Some of these are discussed in the following sections. The literature also contains
many examples of such additives (36,108–112).
Preservatives
Preservatives are necessary to insure the microbiological integrity of a conditioning product. If
the product contains high concentrations of ethyl alcohol (generally 20% or above), additional
preservatives are not needed and the product is described as self-preserving.
For other products, a wide variety of preservatives are available; in general,
combinations of different preservatives provide the broadest possible protection. Every
commercial product that is not self-preserving must be carefully tested over time for adequacy
of preservation. Most of the preservatives used in personal care products are described in the
Cosmetic Preservatives Encyclopedia (110).
Thickeners
As described in the section “Lipophilic Conditioners” thickening as a result of liquid crystal
formation in those products containing common quats and fatty alcohols. Cationic
conditioning polymers can also act as thickeners. Many formulations may require additional
thickening agents. Hydroxyethylcellulose, a nonionic cellulose ether compatible with cationic
surfactants and stable over a wide pH range, is the most common thickening agent added to
conditioning products (36). In addition to providing increased viscosity, this material stabilizes
viscosity over time.
Polyamides may also be used to thicken formulations. A commercial product, Sepigel
(which contains polyamide, laureth-7, and isoparaffin) can be used to emulsify and thicken
lotion or cream conditioners. Other thickeners are described in reference (111).
698
Reich et al.

=== Page 716 ===
Polyacrylate-based thickeners such as carbopol have been widely used in personal care
products. However, in the past these thickeners have not always been compatible with cationic
surfactants. Recently, new thickeners based on polyacrylate chemistry have been commer-
cialized to address this issue. Structure Plus polymer (National Starch & Chemical Company)
and Carbopol Aqua CC polymer (Noveon Inc.) are two examples that are used at low pH and
show good cationic surfactant compatibility.
Humectants
Many conditioners contain humectants whose purpose is to attract moisture. Examples are
propylene glycol, glycerin, honey, chitosan, and hyaluronic acid. These materials are not
expected to be very effective in rinse-off products.
Emulsifiers
As discussed in the section “Lipophilic Conditioners”, the fatty alcohol/quat combinations
found in common conditioners confer stability on product emulsions. If necessary, other
emulsifiers may be added to improve stability. Information on emulsions and emulsifiers may
be found in the literature (112,113) as well as from manufacturers’ technical bulletins. Most
emulsifiers used in conditioners are nonionic, including ethoxylated fatty alcohols, ethoxylated
fatty esters, and ethoxylated sorbitan fatty esters.
CONCLUSION
The foregoing sections have surveyed the action and properties of a diverse assortment of
commercially available conditioning agents. The availability of a large selection of
conditioning materials enables the formulator to tailor products to a wide variety of people
having differing conditioning needs and preferences. Thus, a person having short, straight hair
in good condition might desire a conditioner primarily to control flyaway. Such a need could
be satisfied by one of the ethoquats, which provide light conditioning benefits together with
very good static control. A person having long, heavily bleached hair, on the other hand,
would require improved hair feel, ease-of-combing, and manageability. These benefits could
best be provided by a trialkyl quat.
Those people sensitive to hair feel might prefer a product containing a silicone as a
secondary conditioner. Other people might prefer the convenience of a 2-in-1 shampoo. In
many cases, both 2-in-1 shampoos and stand-alone conditioners are used to condition the hair.
There are a number of ways in which one might satisfy the conditioning needs of a target
population. It is anticipated that the information in this chapter will help the formulator to
quickly choose the best conditioning system for a given purpose. It is also hoped that the
material in this chapter will help the formulator to effectively evaluate new conditioning
agents and even to work with synthetic chemists as well as suppliers to design new
conditioning compounds to solve particular problems.
REFERENCES
1. Robbins CR. Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human Hair. 3rd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag,
1994:343.
2. Kamath YK, Weigmann HD. Measurement of combing forces. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1986; 37:111–124.
3. Jachowicz J. Hair damage and attempts to its repair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1987; 38:263–286.
4. Scott GV, Robbins CR. Effects of surfactant solutions on hair fiber friction. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1980;
31:179–200.
5. Lunn AC, Evans RE. The electrostatic properties of human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:549–569.
6. Jachowicz J, Wis-Surel G, Garcia, ML. Relationship between triboelectric charging and surface
modifications of human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1985; 36:189–212.
7. Reich C, Robbins CR. Interactions of cationic and anionic surfactants on hair surfaces: light-scattering
and radiotracer studies. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1993; 44:263–278.
8. Elkins, L. Hair’s the thing. Household & Personal Products Industry 2006; 43(12):74(6).
9. Robbins CR, Crawford RJ. Cuticle damage and the tensile properties of human hair. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1991; 42:59.
Hair Conditioners
699

=== Page 717 ===
10. Robbins CR. Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human Hair. 3rd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag,
1994:301.
11. Tate ML, Kamath YK, Ruetsch SB, et al. Quantification and prevention of hair damage. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1993; 44:347–371.
12. Garcia ML, Epps JA, Yare RS. Normal cuticle-wear pattern in human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1978;
29:155–175.
13. Kelley S, Robinson VNE. The effect of grooming on the hair surface. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1982;
33:203–215.
14. Crudele J, Bergmann W, Kamis K, et al., inventors; Helene Curtis, Inc., assignee. Heat-mediated
conditioning from shampoo and conditioner hair care compositions containing silicone. US Patent
6,211,125 B1. April 3, 2001.
15. Ruetsch SB, Kamath YK. Effects of thermal treatments with a curling iron on hair fiber. J. Cosmet Sci
2004; 55:13–27.
16. Kamath YK, Danziger CJ, Weigmann HD. Surface wettability of human hair. I. Effect of deposition
of polymers and surfactants. J Appl Polym Sci 1984; 29:1011–1026.
17. Wolfram LJ, Lindemann MKO. Some observations on the hair cuticle. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1971;
22:839–850.
18. Negri AP, Cornell HJ, Rivett DE. A model for the surface of keratin fibers. Text Res J 1993; 63:109–115.
19. Shao J, Jones DC, Mitchell R, et al. Time-of-flight secondary-ion-mass spectrometric (ToF-SIMS) and
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analyses of the surface lipids of wool. J Text Inst 1997; 88
(part 1): No. 4: 317–324.
20. Wilkerson VJ. The chemistry of human epidermis. II. The isoelectric points of the stratum corneum,
hair, and nails as determined by electrophoresis. J Biol Chem1935; 112: 329–335.
21. Robbins CR, Bahl MK. Analysis of hair by electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1984; 35:379–390.
22. Stranick MA. Determination of negative binding sites on hair surfaces using XPS and Ba2þ labeling.
Surf Interface Anal 1996; 24:522–528.
23. Horiuchi T. Nature of damaged hair. Cosmet Toiletr 1978; 93:65–77.
24. Kaplin IJ, Schwann A, Zahn H. Effects of cosmetic treatments on the ultrastructure of hair. Cosmet
Toiletr 1982; 97:22–26.
25. Sandhu SS, Ramachandran R, Robbins CR. A simple and sensitive method using protein loss
measurements to evaluate damage to human hair during combing. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1995; 46:
39–52.
26. Robbins CR. Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human Hair. 3rd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag,
1994: 120–126, 234–249.
27. Robbins CR. Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human Hair. 3rd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag,
1994:341.
28. Schwartz A, Knowles D. Frictional effects in human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1963; 14:455–463.
29. Feughelman M, Willis BK. Mechanical extension of human hair and the movement of the cuticle.
J Cosmet Sci 2001; 52:185–193.
30. Patel A, Greenland H, inventors; Colgate-Palmolive Co., assignee. Hair rinse conditioner. US
patent 4, 726, 945. February 23, 1988.
31. Robbins CR. Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human Hair. 3rd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag,
1994:151.
32. Mitsumatsu A. inventor; The Procter & Gamble Co., assignee. Hair conditioning compositions
comprising water-insoluble high molecular weight oily compound. US patent 6, 368, 582 B1. April 9, 2002.
33. Newell, GP, inventor; Helene Curtis Industries, assignee. Method of restoring normal moisture level
to hair with severe moisture deficiency. US patent 4, 220, 166. September 2, 1980.
34. Quack JM. Quaternary ammonium compounds in cosmetics. Cosmet Toiletr 1976; 91(2):35–52.
35. Gerstein T. An introduction to quaternary ammonium compounds. Cosmet Toiletr 1979; 94(11):32–41.
36. Hunting ALL. Encyclopedia of Conditioning Rinse Ingredients. Cranford, NJ: Micelle Press, 1987.
37. Foerster T, Schwuger MJ. Correlation between adsorption and the effects of surfactants and
polymers on hair. Progr Colloid Polym Sci 1990; 83:104–109.
38. Reich C. Hair cleansers. In: Rieger MM, Rhein LD, eds.Surfactants in Cosmetics. 2nd ed. Surfactant
Science Series, Vol 68. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1997:373.
39. Ruetsch SB, Kamath YK, Weigmann HD. The role of cationic conditioning compounds in
reinforcement of the cuticula. J Cosmet Sci 2003; 54:63–83.
40. Jurczyk MF, Berger DR, Damaso GR. Quaternary ammonium salt. Applications in hair conditioners.
Cosmet Toiletr 1991; 106:63–68.
41. Finkelstein P, Laden K. The mechanism of conditioning of hair with alkyl quaternary ammonium
compounds. Appl Polym Symp 1971; 18:673–680.
42. Jachowicz J. Fingerprinting of cosmetic formulations by dynamic electrokinetic and permeability
analysis. II. Hair conditioners. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1995; 46:100–116.
700
Reich et al.

=== Page 718 ===
43. Spiess E. The influence of chemical structure on performance in hair care preparations. Parfumerie
und Kosmetik 1991; 72(6):370–374.
44. Scott GV, Robbins, CR, Barnhurst JD. Sorption of quaternary ammonium surfactants by human hair.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1969; 20:135–152.
45. Robbins CR, Reich C, Patel A. Adsorption to keratin surfaces: a continuum between a charge-driven
and a hydrophobically driven process. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1994; 45:85–94.
46. Ohbu K, Tamura T, Mizushima N, et al. Binding characteristics of ionic surfactants with human hair.
Colloid Polym Sci 1986; 264:798–802.
47. Stapleton IW. The adsorption of long chain amines and diamines on keratin fibers. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1983; 34:285–300.
48. Yahagi K, Hoshino N, Hirota H. Solution behavior of new cationic surfactants derived from Guerbet
alcohols and their use in hair conditioners. Int J Cosmet Sci 1991; 13:221–234.
49. Garcia ML, Diaz J. Combability measurements on human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1976; 27:379–398.
50. Smith L, Gesslein BW. Multi-functional cationics for hair and skin applications. Cosmet Toiletr 1989;
104:41–47.
51. Polovsky SB. An alkoxylated methyl glucoside quaternary. Cosmet Toiletr 1991; 106:59–65.
52. Kim YD, Kim CK, Lee CN, et al. Hydrolysed ginseng-saponin quaternary: a novel conditioning
agent for hair care products. Int J Cosmet Chem 1989; 11:203–220.
53. Gallagher KF. Superior conditioning and thickening from long-chain surfactants. Cosmet Toiletr
1994; 109:67–74.
54. Jurczyk MF. A new quaternary conditioner for damaged hair. Cosmet Toiletr 1991; 106:91–95.
55. Demangeon Y von, Julemont M, Fraikin M-H, inventors; Colgate-Palmolive Co., assignee.
Concentrated stable nonaqueous fabric softener comp, US patent 4, 851, 141. July 25, 1989.
56. Bolich RE Jr., inventor; The Procter & Gamble Co., assignee. Shampoo compositions, US patent 4,
452, 732. June 5, 1984.
57. Barker G, inventor; Witco Chemical Corporation, assignee. Conditioning shampoo, US patent 4, 247,
538. January 27, 1981.
58. Bolich RE Jr., DiGiulio DN, inventors; The Procter & Gamble Co., assignee. Hair conditioning article
and a method of its use, US patent 4, 206, 195. June 3, 1980.
59. Eckhardt C, inventor; Ciba-Geigy Corporation, assignee. Softening agents containing diester/amine
adducts and quaternary ammonium salts, valuable for use as after-rinse softeners and after-
shampoo hair conditioners, US patent 4, 187, 289. February 5, 1980.
60. Benjamin L, Carson CR, inventors; The Procter & Gamble Co., assignee. Method of conditioning hair
using a flexible substrate, US patent 4, 149, 551. April 17, 1979.
61. Minegishi Y, Arai H, inventors; Kao Soap Co., Ltd., assignee. Softener composition for fabrics or hair.
US patent 4, 102, 795. July 5, 1978.
62. Krueger M, Schulze Zur Wiesche E, inventors; Hans Schwarzkopf & Henkel Gmbh & Co. KG,
assignee. Hair-conditioning agents comprising imidazolines and amino-functional silicones or
dimethiconols WO patent 06012930. February 9, 2006.
63. Giles CD, Kijchotipaisarn A, Sinsawat A, inventors; Unilever PLC, Unilever N.V. and Hindustan
Lever Limited, assignee. Hair treatment compositions, WO patent 05089702. September 29, 2005.
64. Shapiro I, Sajic B, Bezdicek R. Environmentally friendly ester quats. Cosmet Toiletr 1994; 109:77–80.
65. Hunting ALL. Encyclopedia of Conditioning Rinse Ingredients. Cranford: Micelle Press, 1987:147.
66. Fukuchi Y, Okoshi M, Murotani I. Estimation of shampoo and rinse effects on the resistance to flow
over human hair and hair softness using a newly developed hydrodynamic technique. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1989; 40:251–263.
67. Eccleston GM, Florence AT. Application of emulsion theory to complex and real systems. Int J
Cosmet Chem 1985; 7:195–212.
68. Eccleston GM. The structure and rheology of pharmaceutical and cosmetic creams. Cetrimide
creams: the influence of alcohol chain length and homolog composition. J Colloid Int Sci 1976; 57:
66–74.
69. Barry BW, Saunders GM. Kinetics of structure build-up in self bodied emulsions stabilized by mixed
emulsifiers. J Colloid Int Sci 1972; 41:331–342.
70. Barry BW, Saunders GM. The self-bodying action of the mixed emulsifier cetrimide/cetostearyl
alcohol. J Colloid Int Sci 1970; 34:300–315.
71. Barry BW, Saunders GM. The influence of temperature on the rheology of systems containing
alkyltrimethylammonium bromide/cetostearyl alcohol: variation with quaternary chain length.
J Colloid Int Sci 1971; 36:130–138.
72. Su DT-T, inventor; Colgate-Palmolive Co., assignee. Hair conditioner compositions having improved
freezing and freeze-thaw stability. US patent 6, 287, 545 B1. September 11, 2001.
73. Hossel P, Pfrommer E. Test methods for hair conditioning polymers. In: In-Cosmet. Exhib. Conf.
Conf. Proc. Augsburg, Germany: Verlag fuer Chemishe Industrie H. Ziolkowsky1994:133–148.
Hair Conditioners
701

=== Page 719 ===
74. Pfau A, Hossel P, Vogt S, et al. The interaction of cationic polymers with human hair. Macromol
Symp 1997; 126:241–252.
75. Sykes AR, Hammes PA. The use of Merquat polymers in cosmetics. Drug Cosmet Ind February;
1980: 62–66.
76. Faucher JA, Goddard ED. Influence of surfactants on the sorption of a cationic polymer by
keratinous substrates. J Colloid Int Sci 1976; 55(2):313–319.
77. Goddard ED, Faucher JA, Scott RJ, et al. Adsorption of polymer JR on keratinous surfaces—Part II.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1975; 26:539–550.
78. Caelles J, Cornelles F, Leal JS, et al. Anionic and cationic compounds in mixed systems. Cosmet
Toiletr 1991; 106(4):49–54.
79. Hannan RB, Goddard ED, Faucher JA. Desorption of a cationic polymer from human hair: surfactant
and salt effects. Text R J 1978; 48:57
80. Fack G, Restle S, inventors; L’Oreal, assignee. Composition containing at least one particular soluble
conditioning agent and at least one amphiphilic polymer. WO patent 02055035. July 18, 2002.
81. Fack G, Restle S, inventors; L’Oreal, assignee. Composition containing at least one water-insoluble
compound and at least one amphiphilic polymer. WO patent 02055033. July 18, 2002.
82. Fack G, Restle S, inventors; L’Oreal, assignee. Composition containing at least one silicone and at
least one amphiphilic polymer. WO patent 02055032. July 18, 2002.
83. Quinn FX, Ghandchi P, inventors; L’Oreal, assignee. Amphoteric polysaccharide, composition and
use. WO patent 03054025A3. July 3, 2003.
84. Kro¨pke R, Von Der Fecht S, Christiansen M, et al., inventors; Beiersdorf AG, assignee. Surfactant-
containing water-in-oil emulsion having a high proportion of water. WO patent 03070200. August
28, 2003.
85. Derici L, Jenkins PD, Murray AM, et al., inventors; Unilever PLC, Unilever N.V. and Hindustan
Lever Limited, assignee. Hair conditioning compositions. WO patent 03094875. November 20, 2003.
86. Giles C, Christopher D, inventors; Unilever PLC, Unilever N.V. and Hindustan Lever Limited,
assignee. Hair conditioning compositions. WO patent 05039517. May 6, 2005.
87. Detert M, Koller A, Morschha¨user R, inventors; Beiersdorf AG and Clariant GMBH, assignee.
Silicon-modified, sulphonated comb polymers and preparations, especially hair care preparations
based on said silicon-modified, sulphonated comb polymers. WO patent 0218475. March 7, 2002.
88. Philippe M, inventor; L’Oreal, assignee. Cosmetic use of amphoteric polysaccharide compounds
containing cationic polymer chain(s). WO patent 06018322. February 23, 2006.
89. Vic G, Samain H, inventors; L’Oreal, assignee. Cosmetic composition comprising a dendritic polymer
with peripheral fatty chains, a surfactant and a cosmetic agent, and uses thereof. WO patent 05092275.
October 6, 2005.
90. Luoma A, Kara R. Silicones and the perm question. Society of Cosmetic Chemists. 1988 Spring
Conference on Hair Care, London, UK, April 21–23, 1998.
91. Abrutyn ES. Organo-modified siloxane polymers. In: Schueller R, Romanowski P, eds. Conditioning
Agents for Hair and Skin. Cosmetic Science and Technology Series. Vol. 21. New York: Marcel Dekker,
Inc., 1999: 191.
92. Gallagher P, Kreu-Nopakun T, Murray AM. inventors; Unilever Home & Personal Care USA,
assignee. Shampoo compositions comprising and emulsified silicone an a microemulsified silicone.
US patent 6 706 258 B1. March 16, 2004.
93. Berthiaume MD, Jachowicz J. The effect of emulsifiers on deposition of nonionic silicone oils from
oil-in-water emulsions onto keratin fibers. J Colloid Int Sci 1991; 141:299–315.
94. Hoag CA, Rizwan BM, Quackenbush KM. Evaluating silicone emulsions for global hair care
applications. Global Cosmet Ind April 1999: 44–55.
95. Gallagher P, Kreu-Nopakun T, Murray AM, et al., inventors; Unilever Home & Personal Care USA,
division of Conopco, Inc., assignee. Shampoo compositions comprising and emulsified silicone an a
microemulsified silicone. US patent 6, 706, 258 B1. March 16, 2004.
96. Yahagi K. Silicones as conditioning agents in shampoos. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1992; 43:275–284.
97. Nanavati S, Hami A. A preliminary investigation of the interaction of a quat with silicones and its
conditioning benefits on hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1994; 43:135–148.
98. Wendel SR, Disapio AJ. Organofunctional silicones for personal care applications. Cosmet Toiletr
1983; 98:103–106.
99. Berthiaume MD, Merrifield JH, Riccio DA. Effects of silicone pretreatment on oxidative hair damage.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1995; 46:231–245.
100. Rosen MR. Silicone Technologies for Personal Care. Global Cosmetic Industry, May 2000: 28–32.
101. Derici L, Jenkins PD, Shaw NS, et al., inventors; Unilever PLC, Unilever N.V. and Hindustan Lever
Limited, assignee. Shampoo compositions. WO patent 04052324. June 24, 2004.
102. Ueno M. inventor; KAO Corporation, assignee. Hair care product. WO patent 05018586. March 3, 2005.
103. Ainger N, Fairley P, inventors; Unilever Home & Personal Care USA, division of Conopco, Inc.,
assignee. Hair treatment compositions. US patent 6, 610, 280. August 26, 2003.
702
Reich et al.

=== Page 720 ===
104. Ainger NJ, Murray AM, Shaw NS, et al., inventors; Unilever PLC, Unilever N.V. and Hindustan
Lever Limited, assignee. Improved hair conditioners containing silicon blend. WO patent 03092637.
November 13, 2003.
105. Mahadeshwar AR, Tan-walker RLB, Veiro JA, inventors; Unilever PLC, Unilever N.V. and
Hindustan Lever Limited, assignee. Hair treatment compositions WO patent 03075866. September
18, 2003.
106. Rushton H, Gummer CL, Flasch H. 2-in 1 shampoo technology: state of the art shampoo and
conditioner in one. Skin Pharmacol 1994; 7:78.
107. Hoshowski MA. Conditioning of hair. In: Johnson DH, ed. Hair and Hair Care. Cosmetic Science and
Technology Series. Vol. 17. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1997:65–104.
108. Wenninger JA, McEwen GN, eds. CTFA Cosmetic Ingredients Handbook. 3d ed. Washington, DC:
Cosmetic Toiletry and Fragrance Association 1995.
109. Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used in Food, Drugs, and Cosmetics. New
York: John Wiley, 1980.
110. Cosmetic preservatives encyclopedia-antimicrobials (buyer’s guide). Cosmet Toiletr 1990; 105(3):49–63.
111. Lochhead R. Encyclopedia of polymers and thickeners for cosmetics. Cosmet Toiletr 1988; 103(12):
99–129.
112. McCutcheon. Emulsifiers and Detergents. North American Ed. Vol. 1. Glen Rock, New Jersey: MC
Publishing Co., 1991.
113. Becher P, ed. Encyclopedia of Emulsion Technology. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1985.
Hair Conditioners
703

=== Page 722 ===
68
Measuring Hair
R. Randall Wickett
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
Janusz Jachowicz
Better Cosmetics, LLC, Bethel, Connecticut, U.S.A.
THE STRUCTURE OF HUMAN HEAD HAIR
Desmond Morris referred to humans as “Naked Apes” (1). While the body hair on most
humans is vellus, we grow hair on our heads that is far longer than the more abundant coat on
most other mammals. Human head hair typically ranges from 20 to more than 100 mm in
diameter (2), and some people can grow their hair to lengths of more than 5 ft.
The hair shaft is composed of columnar cortical cells that are surrounded by the
overlapping cuticle scales. In some hairs, there may also be a more porous area in the center
called “the medulla.” A transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of a horizontal cross-section
through the hair follicle at the level of the reticular dermis is shown in Figure 1. The various
layers of the follicle and the hair can be clearly seen. Working in from the glassy collagen layer
of the dermis (D) that surrounds the follicle, the outer root sheath (ORS), Henley’s (he) and
Huxley’s (HU) layer of the inner root sheath, the innermost cuticle of the inner root sheath
(CL), and the cuticle (CU) and cortical (CO) layers of the hair shaft itself can be seen. This
particular hair does not show clear evidence of a medulla.
Human head hair has 6 to 10 layers of cuticle when it emerges from the scalp (3). A cross-
section of a hair stained with silver methenamine is shown in Figure 2. Each cuticle cell is
connected to the cortex, and the cells overlap from the root to the tip at an angle of about 58 (4),
causing the well-known directional difference in hair friction (5). Cuticle cells are flat and
approximately square, being about 50 mm on a side and about 0.5-mm thick (4). Each cuticle cell
is composed of a cell membrane complex (CMC) and three distinct internal layers of differing
sulfur content—a-layer, exocuticle, and endocuticle. The CMC has two 3-nm thick b-layers on
either side of an 18-nm thick d-layer. The upper b-layer, which faces out from the hair, has an
outer surface of 18-methyl eicosanoic acid (18-MEA) (6) that is covalently attached to proteins
by thioester bonds (7,8).
Cortical cells are roughly cylindrical being 50 to 100 mm long and 3 to 6 mm in diameter.
They have longitudinal flutings and may separate into smaller fingerlike structures. The cells
are closely packed together in the hair shaft so that the fluted surfaces interlock putting their
cell membrane complexes in contact (9).
The mechanical properties of hair are dominated by the keratin microfibrils in the cortex,
while the optical and surface properties are dominated by the cuticle and particularly by the
state of the 18-MEA on the surface.
DETERMINATION OF HAIR DIMENSIONS
In order to determine tensile properties such as the elastic modulus, it is necessary to
accurately measure the cross-sectional dimension. Determining the cross-sectional dimensions
of a hair is not always straightforward. Not only is hair a thin fiber, it is not necessarily
uniform in cross section. While Caucasian hair is generally considered elliptical in shape,
significant variations from ellipticity can occur. With African-American hair, the problem is
compounded by the high elliptical ratio and the presence of many nonuniform shapes. There is
now laser micrometer that can be used for this purpose. Dia-stron makes an instrument that
can be interfaced with their automated tensile testers. Several measurements must be made
along the fiber, and the fiber must be rotated to ensure measurement of the major and minor
axes of the ellipse. Perhaps the most accurate method of determining the cross-sectional area of
a hair is to section it and measure the diameters directly from the micrographs (10).

=== Page 723 ===
TENSILE PROPERTIES OF HAIR
The mechanical behavior of hair is frequently studied in extension by obtaining a stress/strain
curve. Stress/strain curves for hair can be obtained by using tensile meters such as Instron or
Dia-stron.
Figure 3 shows stress/strain curves for the adjacent sections from the same hair fiber in
extension in water and at 50% relative humidity (RH). The curves can be characterized by three
Figure 1
TEM of cross-section of human hair. Abbreviation: TEM,
transmission electron micrograph. Source: Micrograph courtesy of
Raymond Boissy.
Figure 2
Cross-section of a hair stained with silver
methenamine.
Figure 3
Stress/strain curve for
hair at 50% RH. Data obtained
using a Dia-stron miniature tensile
tester.
706
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 724 ===
different regions. The curve in the first region (A-B) is approximately linear and a slope can be
determined. This part of the curve is often called “the Hookean region,” and it extends to about
102% of the equilibrium length of the fiber (2% strain). The slope of the Hookean region is
considerably higher in dry hair. Between 2% and 4% strain, the curve “turns over” into the
yield region (B-C). In the yield region, very little increase in force is required to increase
extension. In the post-yield region (C-D), which typically begins between 25% and 30%
deformation, the force again increases markedly with strain. For the data presented in Figure 3,
under the specified testing conditions, the slope in the post-yield region was about one-fifth of
that in the Hookean region of the dry fiber. It is also observed that there is little difference in
post-yield slopes between the wet and dry sections of the hair.
Published papers on the mechanical properties of keratin fibers date back to the 1920s
and to the work of Speakman (11) who first reported on the effect of water on keratin
mechanical properties. Since that time, extensive research on hair and wool has led to an
interpretation of each region of the stress/strain curves of keratin fibers in terms of changes
occurring in the molecular structure. Much of the seminal work in this area was carried out by
Max Feughelman, and his book on the subject gives an excellent and detailed overview of the
physical properties of keratin fibers (12).
The curve in the Hookean region (A-B) can be used to calculate Young’s modulus of
elasticity, E. The elastic modulus is the stress divided by the strain, so the cross-sectional
dimensions of the fiber must be known accurately. The sample calculation given below was
done assuming a circular hair with a diameter of 60 mm using typical numbers for a virgin hair
at 50% relative humidity.
Sample calculation of the elastic modulus:
l E ¼ stress/strain ¼ D F*L/(DL*A).
D F is change in force corresponding to the length change DL.
L is length of fiber.
A is the cross-sectional area.
l Assuming circular hair is 60 mm in diameter.
A ¼ 2.83  105 cm2 ¼ 2.83  109 m
l A 10-cm length is extended to 10.2 cm.
2% extension
l Force change is 22 grams force ¼ 0.216 N.
1 gram force ¼ 980 dynes ¼ 9.8  103 N
l E ¼ (0.216  10 cm)/(0.2 cm  2.83  109 m2)
l E ¼ 3.8  109 N/m2
l 1 Pal ¼ 1 N/m2, 1N ¼ 105 dynes, 1 m2 ¼ 104 cm2
l E ¼ 3.8  109 Pa ¼ 3.8  109 N/m2 ¼ 3.8 GPa
l In older papers, E is called Y and is reported in dynes/cm2.
l E ¼ 3.8  1010 dynes/cm2
E is typically about 1.5 to 2.0 GPa for wet hair and 3.5 to 4.0 GPa for hair at 50% to 65%
RH. The mechanical properties of hair or wool in the Hookean region and the effect of water on
mechanical properties (Fig. 3) can be explained by the two-phase model proposed by
Feughelman (13–15). Feughelman’s model considers the mechanical properties of the fiber to
be determined by a water-impenetrable phase, C, the microfibrils, and a water-permeable
phase, M, the matrix. The microfibrils consist of a-helical proteins (keratins) aligned parallel to
the fiber axis (16–19), and the matrix is composed of keratin-associated proteins (20), which are
packed around the microfibrils. The composite is modeled as a fixed spring in parallel with a
spring and viscous dashpot in series; the spring contributes about 1.4 GPa to the Young’s
modulus and is contained in the water-impenetrable microfibrils. The main resistance to
extension of the microfibrils probably comes from the hydrogen bond network in the a-helical
proteins (21). The matrix contributes viscous forces, which decay with time, causing stress
relaxation. The viscosity of the matrix decreases greatly as the water content of the fiber
increases. The two-phase model of keratin fibers accounts for the effects of water on the
mechanical properties, the fact that increasing strain rate increases Young’s modulus, the stress
relaxation behavior in the Hookean region, and the behavior of wet, dry, and permanently set
fibers in torsion (15,21).
Measuring Hair
707

=== Page 725 ===
The Yield Region
Somewhere around 2% to 3% strain, the stress/strain curve “turns over” into the yield region.
Past this point, the stress does not increase markedly until about 25% to 30% extension. The
mechanical properties of a fiber extended into the yield region can be recovered by relaxing the
fiber in water for a few hours if the fiber is not held too long in extension and the extension is
carefully confined to the yield region. This fact is of great practical importance in designing
protocols to measure the effect of treatments on hair strength, as we will see. X-ray diffraction
results have demonstrated that there is a progressive loss of a helical content and a
concomitant increase in b-sheet as a fiber is extended through the yield region (22). By the end
of the yield region, about 30% of the original a-helix has been unfolded reversibly. Mechanical
behavior of keratin in the yield region can be accounted for by application of a Burte–Halsey
model (23). The fiber is considered to contain a continuum of units, which can exist in a short
state, A (a-helix), or an extended state, B (b-sheet), with an energy barrier between the states.
The yield region corresponds to a phase transition between state A and state B at constant
stress. This first-order phase transition, producing a length change at constant stress and
temperature, is thermodynamically equivalent to the transformation of water to steam,
producing a volume change at constant temperature and pressure.
Data from hair strained into the yield region are usually reported as either force at a given
extension such as 15% or 20% or the work to extend a hair to a given extension, which is
obtained by integrating the area under the stress/strain curve. Hu (24) measured the work to
extend hairs to 15% and compared results for Caucasian, Asian, and African-American hair.
Results for Caucasian hair, in terms of W15 as a function of hair diameter, are shown in Figure 4.
Table 1 shows the correlation equations for the work to extend to 20% for hair from each
ethnic group. The work to extend African-American hair by 20% was found to be about two-
thirds of that required for either Asian or Caucasian in agreement with other studies showing
that hair of African origin is not as strong as either Asian or Caucasian hair (25).
Figure 4
Work (in Joules) to extend hair by 15% versus cross-sectional area.
Table 1
Correlation of Work of Extension to Cross-section Area (A) for Different Ethnic Groups
Hair type
Correlation equation
R2
Caucasian
W20 ¼ 0.2676A  0.0002
0.90
African-American
W20 ¼ 0.1844A þ 0.0002
0.83
Asian
W20 ¼ 0.2961  0.0003
0.91
708
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 726 ===
The Post-Yield Region
The C-D region in Figure 3 is known as the post-yield region. Speakman (11) found the post-
yield slope to be independent of the water content of the fiber. This is borne out by the essential
equivalence of the slopes (for dry and wet hair) of the C-D region shown in Figure 3. The
increased stiffness in the post-yield region apparently results from a covalently bonded
network involving cystine. The post-yield slope has been shown to be dependent on the
disulfide content of the fibers (26–28).
Tensile Testers
In the past, stress/strain measurements on hair were mostly made using one of the models of
the Instron1 tensile tester (2,5,29,30). The Instron is a robust and versatile instrument but is
more than a bit of overkill for measuring hair mechanics. In recent years, the Dia-stron
miniature tensile tester (MTT) has been widely used. The instrument can be equipped with an
automated sample head (31) to allow running of up to 100 hairs in one setup and can be
interfaced with a laser micrometer system to automatically measure the dimensions of the hair
fiber.
Software with the instrument can automatically record the stress/strain curve and report
various parameters to the operator, including elastic gradient, work of extension, and breaking
load. Evaluation of hair tensile properties has come a long way from the days of tediously
measuring data points off a chart recorder with a ruler.
Tensile Measurements of Hair Damage
The most common use of hair tensile properties is for the evaluation of the effects of treatment
on hair strength to determine the level of “damage” produced by a given treatment. The
mechanical properties of wet hair are greatly affected by treatments that lead to a reduction in
the number of disulfide bonds. Measurement of breaking strength may show differences
between treatments if they are large and large number of hairs are run, but one must try to
select hairs of approximately the same diameter for measurement, if possible. For this reason,
many workers have relied on the fact that mechanical properties of hair extend into the yield
region, but not beyond, and can be recovered by soaking in water. Beyak et al. (29) extended
hair by 20% and measured the force. After recovery, treatments were investigated using each
hair as its own control. The average change between tests for 25 untreated control hairs was
only –0.33%. In contrast to this, a five-minute “cold wave” treatment led to a 12.6% decline in
the force at 20% extension.
Tate et al. (32) and Robbins and Crawford (33) also used mechanical measurements in
extension to study hair damage. The study by Robbins and Crawford revealed the interesting
fact that significant damage to the cuticle can occur with little or no effect on the tensile
properties of hair.
Gamez-Garcia described the use of short-term relaxation measurements from small
deformations to assess the effect of oils, emulsions and solutions of salts, amino acids, and
proteins on stress recovery in hair fiber (34). The author analyzed the relaxation curves and
showed that the curves had a short-term (on the order of minutes) component and a long-term
(of the order of hours) component. The medium in which the fiber is immersed was found to
have a strong effect on short-term relaxation.
Hu (24) investigated the effects of heat and relaxer treatment using both breaking stress
and the work to 15% extension (Fig. 4). Heat treatments were for five minutes. Relaxer
treatment was with a commercial relaxer according to label directions. Data are summarized in
Table 2 shown below.
Table 2
Effect of Treatment on W15 and Break Stress
Treatment
Change W15 (%)
Change break stress (%)
608C
1.9
5.2
1158C
.02
9.9
1308C
3.5
10.6
1608C
5.9
10.5
Relaxer
25.7
37.5
Measuring Hair
709

=== Page 727 ===
It does appear that breaking stress is more affected by heat at low temperature, and the
effect of heat on breaking stress was significant at 1308C, while W15 was not significantly
affected. This may be due to loss of disulfide bonds that are not extended before post-yield
region is reached. To obtain this kind of result for breaking strength, the hairs must be carefully
prescreened to be of approximately the same diameter.
MECHANICAL FATIGUE BEHAVIOR
Kamath et al. described an apparatus for studying the mechanical fatiguing of hair (25,32). The
instrument subjects the fibers to an impact-loading mode of fatiguing at a constant load and
rate of one cycle per second for up to 100,000 cycles. The strain in hair was kept within the
Hookean range and the fatigue data were interpreted in terms of the following equation:
F(x) ¼ A(x)n
where F(x) is the cumulative probability of failure, x is the number of cycles to failure, and A is
constant. The exponent n and the number of cycles required for half of the specimens to fail (hf)
were employed to quantify the damaging effect of grooming treatments on hair. The exponent
n was found to vary from approximately 0.5  0.052 for untreated hair to 0.11  0.098 for hair
after three perming treatments. A concomitant change in half-life parameter, hf, ranged from
more than 100,000 cycles to 3000 cycles. This technique was also found to be useful in
evaluating fiber damage as a result of bleaching and perming.
DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS
Dynamic mechanical analysis has not been employed frequently in hair studies. This was
probably due to the fact that the old generation instrumentation was difficult to use, and the
experiments were very time consuming.
During the last 20 years, several new instruments were introduced. They include the
dynamic mechanical and thermal analyzer (DMTA) (Rheometric Scientific, Piscataway, New
Jersey, U.S.) and the dynamic mechanical analyzer (Perkin Elmer DMA7), characterized by
high sensitivity, broad dynamic range, and high force control.
The dynamic mechanical experiment gives information on both storage and loss
modulae (or tan delta) and can provide a complete characterization of viscoelastic properties of
hair fibers. The measurements can be performed as a function of time, temperature, or
frequency in both stretching and bending modes of fiber deformation. For characterization of
hair and hair-care products, the bending mode of operation is of particular interest because it is
probably a predominant mode of deformation for “in vitro” hair on the scalp.
An example of the use of dynamic mechanical measurements in hair studies is the pH
dependence of storage modulus shown in Figure 5. The data were obtained through the use
of the DMTA equipped with a humidity controller and an online treatment attachment
(M. Zielinski, unpublished data).
Figure 5A presents the actual DMTA trace, presented as the logarithm of bending
modulus as a function of the experiment’s time, obtained for a 40-fiber assembly mounted in a
frame for a single cantilever bending measurement. The active length of fibers was 1 mm, with
an amplitude- and frequency-held constant at 128 mm peak-to-peak and 3 Hz, respectively. The
pH was adjusted with HCl and NaOH by using solutions at 228C continuously flowing over
the hair sample.
Figure 5B shows the averaged modulus data from Figure 5A plotted as a function of pH.
The results demonstrate a relative constancy of bending modulus in the pH range from 3 to 10,
and its decrease in both very acidic (pH < 2) and very basic (pH > 12) solutions. A similar
analysis can be performed for hair exposed to chemical treatments, surfactants, or polymer
solutions.
Flexabrasion Testing
Swift has pointed out that the mechanism of hair breaking on the head is probably different
from simple breakage in tension (35,36). A method called “the flexabrasion test” may be
710
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 728 ===
more relevant to the actual consumer experience. In this test, weighted hairs are pulled
back and forth across a fine wire by a reciprocating motor as illustrated in Figure 6 on the next
page.
The parameter measured is the number of cycles required to break 50% of the hairs. This
number has a very high variance from hair to hair. Swift reported data were obtained using
adjacent sections of the same hair for treatment and control to reduce the variance. By using
three sections from each hair, a control, a damaging treatment and an intervention could be
studied. Some of Swift’s (36) data are presented in Table 3.
Data from this method are the basis of some rather extreme sounding claims for large
increases in hair strength. It is not the tensile strength that is increased by the treatment but the
resistance to fraying under repeated abrasion. This method will obviously reflect the presence
of treatments that can reduce the friction between the wire and the hair.
Figure 5
Dynamic mechanical analysis. (A) DMTA trace obtained by employing an online treatment procedure
(with HCl and NaOH solutions) and shown as the logarithm of the bending modulus. (B) Bending modulus of wet
intact hair as a function of pH. Abbreviation: DMTA, dynamic mechanical and thermal analyzer.
Measuring Hair
711

=== Page 729 ===
Torsion and Bending Measurements
Forming a curl from straight hair involves a combination of twisting and bending deformations.
Response to torsion or bending stress is highly dependent on hair diameters, as both the bending
and torsional moments of inertia depend on the fourth power of cross-sectional dimensions. For
example, the resistance to bending of an elliptical hair is given by E*Ib, where E is bending
modulus and Ib is the bending moment of inertia, and by (p/64)ab3, where a and b are the major
and minor semidiameters of the ellipse. The torsional moment of inertia is given by It ¼ (p/4)
(a3b þ b3a), while the resistance to twisting is given by G*(p/4)(a3b þ b3a), where G is the shear
modulus. Because of this extreme dependence on cross-sectional dimensions, the cuticle may
contribute more to torsion or bending than to extension, especially with very fine hairs.
The shear modulus of a fiber can be determined using a torsion pendulum. In this method, a
small cylindrical weight is hung from the hair. Application of torque to the weight causes it to
rotate back and forth. If a small white strip or a small mirror is attached to the weight as illustrated
in Figure 7, the amplitude and period of the torsional deformation as the weight rotates can be
easily determined. The shear modulus can be determined from the following equation:
G ¼ (Ml/o2)/It
where l is the fiber length, It is (p/4)(a3b þ b3a) as explained above, and M is moment of inertia
of the weight. Another parameter that can be determined from a torsion pendulum is the log
Table 3
Effect of Conditioner on Bleached Hair by Flexabrasion
Conditioner
Bleached
Bleached þ conditioner
Difference
Increase (%)
p
Leave on
1066.5
1621.5
555.1
52.1
0.04
Rinse off
649.7
1548.9
699.2
82.3
0.01
Figure 6
Illustration of the flexabrasion test.
Figure 7
A schematic of a torsion pendulum for the study of
hair.
712
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 730 ===
decrement (d). Log decrement is related to the log of the change in amplitude between one
cycle and the next. Log decrement will be increased by treatments or conditions that either
increase frictional loss or decrease the storage of elastic potential energy as the fiber twists.
Pesuad and Kamath (37) have recently described such a device in detail.
Bogaty (38) first pointed out how important the behavior of hair under torsional and
bending strains is to formation and maintenance of hairstyle. He reported that permanent
waving decreased the torsional rigidity of hair in the wet state but actually increased it slightly
at 65% RH. Harper and Kamath (39) reported similar results for bleached hair. At low RH, the
shear modulus of bleached hair was higher than that for untreated hair, but above 70% RH the
shear modulus of bleached hair was found to be lower than for untreated hair.
Wolfram and Albrecht (40) carried out torsional measurements on hair using a torsion
pendulum. They concluded that the cuticle is very stiff in the dry state and may make a
significant contribution to the torsional rigidity, especially for fine hairs. However, in the wet
state, the cuticle was found to be so plasticized as to make no contribution to mechanical
behavior. On the other hand, Harper and Kamath (39) and Yasuda et al. (41) reported that the
cuticle makes a significant contribution to the shear modulus of dry hair.
Bending is also a key component of a hairstyle, but bending measurements are generally
not simple to perform. Scott and Robbins (42) described a method for measuring the bending
stiffness of hair using a balance. A long hair is draped over a small wire with small weights
attached to each end. The bending stiffness can be calculated from the distance between the two
ends. It is also possible to measure bending strength by a three-point beam deflection method.
This method has been applied to measuring the stiffness of beard hairs (43). Another approach is
cantilever beam method as applied by Yasuda et al. (41). The balanced fiber method has the
disadvantage of requiring a relatively long fiber but is simpler to use. Wortman and Kure (44)
used a similar fiber method to study bending relaxation during permanent waving of hair.
SPECTROSCOPY
Fluorescence Spectroscopy
Fluorescence spectroscopy is employed to measure the wavelength dependence of the
intensity of emitted light as a function of the excitation wavelength. Hair and skin are
characterized by strong fluorescence because of the presence of tryptophan, kynurenine,
tyrosine, and phenylalanine aminoacids in the structure of keratin. Tryptophan has the
strongest absorption (lmax ¼ 280 nm, emax ¼ 4500 M1 cm1) and a high-quantum yield of
fluorescence. Its fluorescence band, excited at 290 nm, has a maximum in the range from 330 to
350 nm, which is dependent on the extent of hair pigmentation.
The technique has been employed as a sensitive analytical technique to study reactions
accompanying hair photo and thermal degradation (45–47). A fluorescence instrument used to
study hair is typically equipped with remote fiber optics, which allows for recording the
spectra directly from hair fibers. Experiments described in the literature consisted of
irradiating hair with UV/visible light and recording emission spectra in a wavelength range
where fluorescence emission occurs. Photodegradation studies have shown that tryptophan
undergoes photodecomposition that can be quantified by the measurements of the emission
intensity at 300 to 550 nm for hair before and after exposure (Fig. 8). The peaks at 350 , 420 , and
465 nm have been assigned to tryptophan, N-formylkynurenine, and kynurenine, respectively
(45,47). The intensity of emission of all these chromophores is shown to decrease as a result of
photoirradiation, with tryptophan emission undergoing the largest change. The phenomenon
was shown to occur both in natural outdoor conditions and as a result of artificial light
irradiations in a weatherometer. This technique can also be used to determine the extent of hair
photoprotection, in terms of tryptophan damage, by incorporating photofilters in hair-care
formulations such as conditioners, mousses, shampoos, and hairsprays.
IR and Raman Spectroscopy
Raman and infrared (IR) spectroscopies provide alternative ways to detect vibrational states
of molecules. While transitions producing IR bands are due to vibrations of groups with a
permanent dipole, those corresponding to Raman bands are due to changes in the polarizability
of nonpolar groups as a result of nuclear motion.
Measuring Hair
713

=== Page 731 ===
In recent publications on hair, fourier transform (FT)-IR spectroscopy was combined with
a microscope (referred to as FT-IR microscopy), allowing researchers to examine hair shaft
areas in the size range 10 to 100 nm. Bramanti et al. (48) examined micro regions of hair for
anagen, catagen, and telogen hair. The data from bulb and shaft areas were analyzed in terms
of relative intensities of amide II (1540 cm1) and amide III (1238 cm1) vibrations of the
protein component of hair structure and O-P-O vibrations (1080 cm1) of nucleic acids. It was
shown on the basis of simple spectra and their derivatives that there was a gradual change in
the ratios of absorbance values for nucleic acids/proteins (A1080/A1238) for inferior bulb,
central bulb, and suprabulbar and shaft regions for anagen, catagen, and telogen hair. It was
suggested that these ratios can be used as reproducible parameters to differentiate the anagen,
catagen, and telogen hair phase and to estimate the degree of hair aging.
Other reported applications of FT-IR microscopy included an estimation of the extent of
hair oxidation by analyzing the intensity of a peak at 1041 cm1 corresponding to cysteic acid
formation in the oxidation of cystine (45).
In a typical Raman experiment, the sample is irradiated with an intense beam of light at a
specified frequency u. The emitted light consists of radiation with an unchanged frequency of
u (light scattering and refractive index), Raman bands with frequencies at u þ u0 (Stokes band),
and u–u0 (anti-Stokes band).
The main advantage of Raman spectroscopy in studies of biological molecules is the low
intensity of the water spectrum. A strong IR spectrum of water overlaps the regions where
biomolecules have IR absorption bands. The intensity of water spectrum in Raman
spectroscopy is relatively weaker, which makes it useful for studies of proteins, etc.
For hair, Raman measurements were reported for unpigmented and bleached hair,
employed to minimize the fluorescence effects predominant in more pigmented fibers (49,50).
The spectra of untreated hair show a number of bands not observed in the IR analysis. They
correspond to disulfide bonds (510 cm1), tyrosine (646 cm1, 853/827 cm1), phenylalanine
(1003 cm1), and tryptophan (1554 cm1).
The Raman spectra could be used to assess the incurred damaged associated with hair
bleaching, permanent waving, and photoirradiation:
l For bleaching, a decrease in intensity of the 510 cm1 band with a concomitant increase
in the intensity of a band at 1045 cm1 (SO3, cysteic acid) was observed.
l For perming, reduced hair showed a peak reduction at 510 cm1 and the appearance of
a peak at 2568 cm1 (mercaptan).
l For photodamaged hair, analysis showed a decrease in intensity of the disulfide band with
the appearance of vibrations corresponding to sulfur in various oxidation states, including
a thiosulfonate bond. In addition to this, there was an increase in the intensity of a
mercaptan band and a change in the amide I region corresponding to a disordered protein.
Figure 8
Comparison of the fluorescence spectra of untreated and piedmont hair irradiated for 48 hours in a
weatherometer.
714
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 732 ===
Near Infrared Spectroscopy
Near infrared spectroscopy (NIR) refers to the portion of the IR spectrum in the wavelength
range from 1000 to 2200 nm (10,000 –4500 cm1). The observed bands correspond to overtones
and combination of characteristic bond vibrations. The technique is typically employed to
study bands corresponding to O-H from water, C-H from hydrocarbons, and N-H for proteins.
It may also cause transitions of highly delocalized electronic systems, such as those present in
the structure of melanin.
Several authors evaluated NIR spectroscopy for studying hair (51,52). Pande et al. (52)
found the technique well suited for measuring relative moisture content of hair in situ. The
NIR spectra of hair conditioned at 50% RH and dehydrated by heating to 1108C for 90 minutes
are shown in Figure 9. It was concluded that peaks at 1450 and 1935nm are due to water, while
the peaks at 1740 cm1 are related to methylene C-H stretch, and the bands at 2051 and 1984
nm are due to protein. The 1900-nm absorption was further used to quantify the amount of
water in hair at 50% RH after drying and as a result of moisture regain. The technique proved
to be sensitive to detect small differences in the kinetics of moisture regain observed for hair
treated with a hair-care product such as conditioner.
Another application described by Pande et al. (52) is the measurements of melanin
bleaching during oxidative coloring of hair. Such measurements are possible because the
synthetic hair dyes have no effect on the reflectance of hair beyond 750 nm, while natural
melanin strongly absorbs in NIR range from 1000 to 1300 nm. The data revealed that the
bleaching effect can be quantified in terms of melanin absorption and even small differences
between bleaching products can be detected. It should be added that such measurements
cannot be performed with a typical colorimeter because of interference from the synthetic dyes.
Integrating Sphere Spectrophotometry
Integrating Sphere spectrophotometry is employed to study the absorbance of light scattering
samples such as dispersions of solids and liquids. In cosmetic research, one frequently deals
with non-transparent materials, or chromophores incorporated in turbid formulations, or
deposited on non-transparent substrates such as skin or hair. In such cases, one cannot employ
routine UV-vis spectroscopy because the light scattering results in a very weak intensity of
transmitted light. In order to include scattered light, a technique referred to as integrating
sphere UV-vis spectroscopy is employed. In this method, the scattered light is focused by
Figure 9
Near-IR absorption spectrum of unpigmented human hair (fine line) and the effect of water (bold line).
Abbreviation: IR, infrared.
Measuring Hair
715

=== Page 733 ===
reflecting from the walls of a BaSO4-coated sphere. The spectra can be obtained by UV-vis
spectrophotometers equipped with an integrating sphere, which operate in the transmission or
reflectance mode (e.g., a Perkin Elmer Model 950). An example of the usage of the instrument
in the transmission mode is testing skin-care sunscreen formulation to determine a sun
protection factor (SPF) value. The tested product, which is typically a turbid formulation, is
spread on the surface of a substrate (e.g., artificial skin), and the spectra are collected in the
transmission mode and subsequently converted into Koubelka-Munk absorbance units. By
using appropriate controls as well as the erythema action spectrum of sunlight, one can
calculate the SPF value of a given product. In hair research, the technique is a quantitative tool
to study hair coloration. Figure 10 presents a plot of absorbance (in Koubelka-Munk units) as a
function of wavelength for hair with various levels of natural hair color classified by visual
grading on the scale from 1 (black) to 10 (white). The data, such as those presented in this
figure, can be further processed by, for example, mathematical spectral subtraction to derive
information about the hair deposition of sunscreens, artificial hair color, color fading, etc.
X-ray Spectroscopy
The crystalline structure of keratins has been extensively studied in the past by X-ray
diffraction (21,22,53,54). A new approach to this problem has been the use of synchrotron
radiation, which can produce high quality X-ray diagrams in short experimental times (55).
High-resolution small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and wide angle X-ray scattering
(WAXS) diffraction patterns were obtained by using high-intensity synchrotron radiation. SAXS
diffractograms permitted the calculation of intermacrofibrillar, intermicrofibrillar, and inter-
protafibrillar distances (88, 67.7, and 40 A˚ , respectively). WAXS gave the distance between
individual helices (5.15 and 9.8 A˚ ).
The key result was that cosmetic treatments, including perming, bleaching, or a
combination of both, affect not only the distances between supramolecular elements of hair
structure but also the distances between individual protein chains (55). Larger distances
between micro-, macro-, and protafibrils are reflected in the increased swelling of chemically
treated hair, a well-known phenomenon previously described. On the other hand, an increase
in interhelical separation, probably as a result of interaction with water, was unexpected
because of previously accepted models that assumed that the crystalline phase of hair structure
was impenetrable by water or aqueous solutions of hair treatments.
Figure 10
Absorbance (Koubelka-Munk
units) as a function of wavelength for hair
with various levels of pigmentation. The data
were obtained by using integrating sphere
UV-vis spectrophotometer in the reflectance
mode. Abbreviation: UV, ultraviolet. Source:
Courtesy of Johnson and Johnson Co.
716
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 734 ===
ESR
Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy measures the transitions of an unpaired electron
between energy levels produced by magnetic field (56). This is due to the phenomenon that an
electron spinning at a given frequency can adopt two spin orientations in a magnetic field with
each characterized by a different energy. It is possible to induce transitions between electronic
spin energy levels by applying electromagnetic radiation with the frequency equal to the
electron’s precessional frequency. A typical magnetic field range employed in an ESR
experiment is from zero to a few tesla units. ESR can only be employed for the detection of
unpaired electrons such as free radicals and radical ions. The key parameters employed to
characterize the ESR spectrum are (i) electron precessional frequency given by
Vprec ¼ 13.95 [GHzT1]gB0
where B0 is the strength of the magnetic field in tesla units (T), and (ii) g, which is referred to as
the Lande factor. The values of g vary from 2.00220 for the ethylene radical to 2.0091 for the
trichloromethane radical. A typical precessional frequency for a free electron at a field strength
of 0.34 T is about 9500 MHz. The population difference between electrons in different spins
states is larger than in NMR experiment for protons (it can be calculated from Boltzmann
distribution), and therefore, ESR spectroscopy is more sensitive than NMR Spectroscopy. An
ESR spectrum can be obtained for radicals at a concentration as low as 108 M at room
temperature for a volume of a few 10ths of a milliliter in both the liquid and solid state. Also,
the time scale of an ESR event is about 109 seconds; thus, it is faster than that in proton NMR,
so the technique can provide information about processes that are too fast for NMR analysis.
As in NMR, an ESR signal of one electron can be split by a magnetic field of neighboring
hydrogens according to Pascal’s triangle rule. The separation between lines in a multiplet in
the ESR spectrum is termed “hyperfine coupling” and is designated by symbol a (in Gauss
units). For example, for a methyl radical, the ESR signal will be a quadruplet (with the intensity
ratio of 1:3:3:1) at g ¼ 2.00255 and a ¼ 23.0 G.
In cosmetic chemistry, the application of this technique is limited to the studies of
oxidation, antioxidants, and melanin chemistry. For melanins, the ESR spectrum consists of a
featureless peak with a line width of about 4 to 6 G and a g value close to 2.004 (57). There is no
hyperfine coupling, and the spin concentration is very small, about 4 to 10  1017 spins/g. The
ESR method of melanin characterization is important because this natural polymer is
considered to be a photoprotective and antioxidant agent for skin and hair.
Photoirradiation of hair was also investigated by ESR using spin trapping with DMPO
(5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide), which forms DMPO-OH adduct with brown, bleached,
and red hair (58). The spectral evidence confirms the formation of oxyradicals during
photoirradiation. Bleached and red hair (pheomelanin) was also found to produce more
oxyradicals than black hair melanin (eumelanin).
MICROSCOPY
Optical Microscopy
Optical microscopy is employed for a variety of tasks in a cosmetic laboratory. It is very useful
to evaluate hair geometrical shape and dimensions, detect the presence of surface deposits, or
assess a degree of fiber damage in terms of cortex integrity, state of cuticles, or the presence of
split ends. Traditional light microscopy, however, has limited resolution (approximately half
of the wavelength of light) and is characterized by limited depth of field. New instruments
address this problem by collecting images of the object at various focal lengths and
subsequently computing reconstructed in-focus image.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Electron microscopy requires high vacuum and metal coating of a nonconductive polymer for
biological samples. The resolution of this technique is limited to a few nanometers. Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) is usually not sensitive enough to detect adsorbed polymers or a
surfactant layer with molecular dimensions. Newer SEM instruments offer ease of use and are
capable of producing good resolution images (below a magnification of 5000) without metal
coating. They can be also equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence detectors, which
Measuring Hair
717

=== Page 735 ===
can display energies characteristic of the elements in the sample. The results are typically
presented in the form of a histogram of signal strength as a function of energy (eV) with the
detection limits ranging from 0.05% to 2%. Signal strength is related to relative concentration of
a given element in the sample. Qualitative, semiquantitative, and quantitative bulk determi-
nation of elements for atomic numbers higher than 13 (all elements except H, He, Li, and Be) is
possible. Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) can also provide elemental maps of the sample
by identifying the elemental compositions of sample features as small as 1 mm.
Figure 11A presents an SEM image of hair (without metal coating) at a magnification of
3000 obtained by a benchtop Hitachi SEM instrument. The image illustrates the presence of
granular surface deposits, which concentrate in the areas close to the cuticle edges. The use of
EDS detector (Fig. 10B) indicates a high content of Si and Ca in the structure of the deposited
material.
Atomic Force Microscopy
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) can be used for imaging nonconductive surfaces of
materials from the atomic to micron scale. Atomic force microscopy (AFM), and lateral force
microscopy (LFM) fall under SPM designation of techniques, which also include scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM), chemical force microscopy (CFM), and phase detection
microscopy (PDM). These techniques can provide information about the topography and
frictional and mechanical properties of a sample from the nanoscale to micron level. In both
AFM and LFM, the probe, in the form of a sharp tip attached to a cantilever, scans the surface
by using force on the order of 10 to 20 nN in the contact mode and 0.1 nN in the tapping mode.
The latter is used to measure the surface characteristics of soft materials such as keratin fibers.
In AFM, one obtains a topographical image by measuring the deflection of a soft cantilever, to
Figure 11
(A) SEM micrograph of hair at 3000 magnification and (B) results of EDS analysis of surface
deposits concentrated near the cuticle edges. Abbreviations: SEM, scanning electron microscopy; EDS,
energy dispersive spectroscopy. Source: Courtesy of Sunny Chen of Johnson and Johnson Co.
718
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 736 ===
which the tip is attached, as the tip is rastered over the surface. The cantilever deflections
normal to the surface are representative of topographical surface features. In LFM, one
measures the torsional twisting of the cantilever as it is rastered over the surface. These lateral
cantilever deflections result from drag forces between the tip and sample surface.
Both AFM and LFM have been used in cosmetic field to image hair fibers and to identify
new morphological features under dry and wet conditions (59–67). O’Connor et al. (59)
employed an atomic force microscope to quantitatively analyze the morphology of hair in air
and water, the kinetics of hair hydration, and the effect of pH on hair morphology. Images were
analyzed quantitatively by taking line cuts to illustrate height data versus position. They have
shown that an average step height in the cuticle sheaths increased from 500 nm for dry hair to
1200 nm for wet fibers. By following the changes in geometrical dimensions of the cuticle height,
they were also able to determine the rate constant of hydration and the effect of pH on swelling.
Goddard et al. (60,61) used an atomic force microscope in both modes (contact and
tapping) to collect data on the distribution and configuration of adsorbed cationic polymers on
the surfaces of hair and mica. They concluded that the hair surface is not smooth enough for
quantitative analysis. Mica, on the other hand, has a model, well-characterized surface.
Goddard’s study of cationic polymers on mica demonstrated loop-and-trains configuration of
adsorbed polymer chains, molecular weight dependence of the layer thickness, and polymer
distribution as a function of charge density.
McMullen et al. (64) employed LFM to visualize deposition of cationic polymers on hair.
Figure 12 presents a comparison of error signal image of untreated and co(vinylpyrrolidone—
methacrylamidopropyl trimethylammonium chloride)-treated hair. The surface properties of
hair treated with the polymer change significantly, with the polymer deposits taking the form
of donut-shaped structures. The inside and outside diameters of the polymer deposits were
determined to be 70  11 nm and 202  47 nm, respectively. Since the diameter of hair
micropores was found to be 149 nm, it is plausible that the polymer may bind preferentially to
the perimeter of the pores whose edges would presumably have a higher electric field than the
more homogenous portion of the hair surface.
Confocal Microscopy
Confocal microscopy can be used to obtain specimen images that do not have out-of-focus
areas. In a classical light microscope, the light illuminates a large portion of the sample, and if
its geometry is not flat, a part of the image is always out of focus. Confocal light microscopy
employs a focused beam of light with a reflected light passing through a pinhole in front of a
detector, eliminating out-of-focus reflections. A focal plane image is generated by scanning the
surface. Internal elements of a structure can also be scanned in a similar way, with the
limitation being the opacity of the specimen.
Swift et al. (68) studied the penetration of fluorescently labeled proteins through intact and
chemically modified hair fibers. The extent of penetration was assessed by imaging transverse
sections of resin-embedded hair with a confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscope. It was
determined that the main sites for peptide deposition were endocuticle, cortex, nuclear remanants,
intermicrofibrillar matrix, and cell boundaries that undergo massive swelling by water.
Figure 12
(A) Untreated hair (B) and hair treated with polyquaternium-28, as imaged by using error signal by
LFM (64). Abbreviation: LFM, lateral force microscopy.
Measuring Hair
719

=== Page 737 ===
Corcuff et al. (69) used confocal microscopy to study the surface of dry, wet, and
chemically modified hair. They claimed resolution of 0.25 versus 0.6 mm for conventional light
microscopy. Their technique made possible the direct observation of sweat and sebum on hair
surface and the quantitative assessment for periodic bulging of cuticles on swelling. They have
also performed optical sectioning of hair samples at various depths to provide a three-
dimensional reconstruction of the internal structure of hair stained with a fluorescent marker.
MICROFLUOROMETRY
The instrumental setup consists of a fluorescence illuminator, objective, interference filters,
photomultiplier, and a scanning sample stage. The hair fiber was illuminated by a focused
beam of light, and the fluorescence emission was monitored by a photomultiplier as the
specimen was moved under the exciting light.
Weigmann et al. (70) employed microfluorometry to study deposition, substantivity, and
buildup of various components of cosmetic formulations on hair. They used the sodium salt of
fluorescein as a marker and assumed that the deposited film thickness, resulting from the
precipitation of polymers, surfactants, and polymer-surfactant complexes, is directly propor-
tional to fluorescence intensity. Various distributions of emitted light intensity were observed,
including honeycomb patterns, which may be indicative of hair damage. Multiple treatments
of hair with shampoos containing cellulose (and fluorescent marker) showed gradual increases
in fluorescence intensity and an uneven distribution of surface deposits.
SURFACE ANALYSIS
Dynamic Electrokinetic and Permeability Analysis
Electrokinetic measurements have been applied in wool and hair research for some time.
Recent developments, however, have made possible simultaneous measurements of electro-
kinetic and permeability parameters of fiber plugs in order to obtain information about the
interactions of various cosmetic raw materials with hair (71–75). The technique has been
termed “dynamic electrokinetic and permeability analysis” (DEPA).
The DEPA instrument consists of a streaming potential cell, conductivity meter, pressure
transducer, test and treatment solution reservoirs, flow interruptor, an electronic balance, and
several electric and manual valves. The most important features of the design are
l online positioning of test and treatment solution reservoirs, permitting fiber treatment
within the streaming potential cell;
l the pulse mode of flow for test and treatment solutions;
l simultaneous measurement of the streaming potential, conductivity, and flow rate
(permeability of the plug); and
l special software allowing flexible programming of the experimental procedures, such
as the control of pressure and the timing of treatment and test cycles.
A typical experiment yields information about the electrokinetic characteristics and
permeability of untreated fibers and the kinetics of sorption/desorption of cosmetic actives as
a result of one or multiple treatments of hair. Figure 13 presents the results of an experiment in
which hair was treated with 0.5% solutions of anionic surfactant (SLES-2), cationic surfactant
cetryltrimethyl ammonium chloride, and cationic polymer cationic guar gum. The first five
data points in each figure correspond to untreated hair. They are followed by a 5-minute
treatment period, first measurement period of 30 minutes, a second 5-minute treatment period,
and the second measurement period of 30 minutes.
Figure 13A presents the time dependence of x-potential and demonstrates an increase in
hair-negative x-potential as a result of binding of SLES-2 to hair. It also shows a reversal of the
surface charge for hair treated with quaternary ammonium surfactant and cationic polymer.
While surfactants are rinsed off the hair after prolonged treatment with the test solution, a
layer of cationic guar gum is stable and imparts a permanent positive x-potential to hair.
720
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 738 ===
Figure 13
(A) x-potential (B), flow rate (C), and conductivity as function of time for hair treated with different
classes of materials such as anionic surfactant (sodium laureth-3 sulfate), cationic surfactant (cetyl
trimethylammonium chloride), and cationic polymer (cationic guar gum).
Measuring Hair
721

=== Page 739 ===
The flow rate data (Fig. 13B) show that only in the case of cationic guar gum there is a
formation of a thick layer of the polymer (2.7 and 3.94 mm after the first and second treatment,
respectively) on the surface of hair. This is probably due to the presence of microgels of the
polysacchride in the treatment solution.
The hair conductivity is slightly reduced after quat (cetryltrimethyl ammonium chloride)
treatment, a behavior typical for all cationics (Fig. 13C). A small delay in conductivity decrease
for the polymer is related to the reduced flow and the resulting prolonged presence of the excess
treatment solution in the plug. In contrast to this, SLES-2 slowly desorbs from hair and gives rise
to increased conductivity of the plug even after extended rinsing with the test solution.
Similar data can be obtained not only for simple single component systems but also for
complex, multicomponent solutions such as shampoos, conditioners, hair dyes, or any other
finished cosmetic product.
The main criteria of product assessment are changes in the B-potential, permeability, and
conductivity relative to an untreated control. On the basis of these parameters, one can make
conclusions about the deposition of cationic, anionic, nonionic surfactants, and polymers on
hair. One can also obtain information regarding emulsions, substantivity of various treatments,
their removability upon shampooing, buildup on consecutive treatments with the same
formulation, and rate of desorption of residual surfactants or polymers (71–75).
The technique can also be employed to quantify the “sealing effects” produced by
surfactants, polymers, and oils on dyed hair (71) or on fibers subjected to reactive treatments
such as perming or bleaching (74).
A significant advantage of DEPA is that it performs the measurements on fiber assemblies
rather than on single fibers, giving an average value of the assessed parameters. Also, the
experimental protocols can be planned so that they simulate any sequence of operations performed
on real hair, such as a combination of treatments including shampooing, conditioning, or perming.
Wettability
The use of wettability measurements to study the effect of chemical and physical treatments on
the surface of hair has been described in detail by Kamath et al. (76). They basically employed a
high-sensitivity balance and measured the wettability forces by immersing hair fibers into water
or other liquids. An advance in this area, reported by the same authors, was the development
of liquid membrane wettability scanning. In this process, a fiber is passed through a liquid
membrane, and the measured wettability force is calculated from the following equation (77):
F ¼ PgLV(cos qa  cos qr)
where P is the fiber perimeter, gLV is the surface tension of the membrane liquid, and qa and qr
are the contact angles in the advancing and receding modes.
A typical experimental procedure consists of obtaining wettability scans along the length
of fibers before and after treatments with solutions of conditioning actives, such as cationic
cellulose or protein. Determining the value of qr in a separate experiment, and assuming that it
does not change along the fiber length, allows one to obtain a plot in which cosqa is a function
of distance. The wettability traces usually show a lot of variation along the length of a fiber so
that an average value is usually employed for comparisons between intact and modified hair.
It was shown that unoxidized hair, characterized by a value of cos qa ¼ 0.22  0.17, becomes
more hydrophilic after a single treatment with a solution of a cationic polymer as evidenced by
an average value of cos qa ¼ 0.08  0.15. This method was also employed to assess the effect
of multiple treatments.
In current laboratory practice, automated wettability instruments are employed. They
are capable of detecting a point of contact with the liquid during the fiber movement in the
advancing direction, reverse the direction of movement to measure receding wettability
forces, detect the point of separation from the liquid, average the forces during the fiber
scan, and calculate contact angles using previously determined fiber perimeter (which is
accomplished by employing wettability data for a given fiber obtained by using hexane as a
solvent). Figure 14A,B shows wettability traces (wettability force as a function of distance) for
virgin hair (Fig. 14A) and for bleached hair (Fig. 14B). On the basis of these measurements,
the advancing contact angles were found to be 101.68 and 41.28 for intact and commercially
bleached hair, respectively.
722
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 740 ===
Profilometry-FT and Fractal Analysis
Profilometry has been recently employed to study the geometrical properties of hair surface
(78,79). This technique in which the surface of hair is scanned longitudinally using a wedge-
shaped stylus has a resolution similar to that of optical microscopy.
A typical experimental result is a hair surface profile exhibiting a large number of
random peaks and valleys ranging in size from a fraction of a micron to millimeters. The
traditional way of handling these data is to calculate roughness parameters such as average
roughness depth, average roughness, or geometric average roughness (78). However, these
parameters are not constant and increase with an increase of the scan length, a consequence of
self-similarity or fractality of hair surface profile (79).
Hair profilometric traces can be subject to Fourier transform (FT) in which the height
versus length dependence is converted into intensity versus frequency spectra, where
frequency is termed “spatial frequency” and is defined as number of crests per unit length. The
analysis of the averaged FT spectra of hair surface showed no preferred frequencies of height
variation and allowed for calculation of the fractal dimensions. They were found to be 1.31 for
the high-frequency (small spatial dimension) end and 1.63 for the low-frequency (large spatial
Figure 14
Wettability trace for (A) intact and (B) bleached hair.
Measuring Hair
723

=== Page 741 ===
dimension) end. This leads to the conclusion that hair is “smoother” in the probing scale from
0.5 to 5 mm than in the scale from 5 to 100 mm.
Combing Measurements
The use of quantitative combing measurements has been well established in the character-
ization of hair-care products. The technique has been developed over the years by Newman
et al. (80), Tolgyesi et al. (81), Garcia et al. (82), and Kamath et al. (83). It is widely used in
research, development, and claim substantiation.
The method consists of passing a comb through a hair tress, with a well-defined
geometry, and measuring force as a function of distance. These measurements can be
performed on dry or wet fibers. The parameters used for comparing product performance
include the maximum combing force or combing work. The data are typically reproducible
within 20% for wet-combing measurements and 50% for dry-combing measurements.
Jachowicz et al. recently reported a modification of the method aimed at increasing its
sensitivity (84,85). The method, termed “spatially resolved combing analysis,” employs special
frames that allow the application of a treatment to selected areas of the fibers while shielding
the remaining portions, thereby providing internal reference sections. The treatments may
include thermal exposure, wet applications of cosmetic formulations or raw materials, and
physical modification of hair by photoirradiation. The combing curves of hair treated in such a
way, obtained by using a tensile tester such as Instron or Dia-Stron, show positive or negative
peaks depending on whether the treatment results in an increase or a decrease in friction of the
hair surface.
Figure 15 illustrates the application of this method to the analysis of two different
conditioners on hair. Their affinity to hair is assessed by performing combing measurements
Figure 15
Differential combing curves for hair treated with (A) conditioning agent 1 and (B) conditioning agent 2
and subsequently subjected to two shampooings.
724
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 742 ===
after hair treatment and after two subsequent shampooings. The presented traces are
differential combing curves obtained by subtracting a curve for untreated hair from the
combing trace obtained after a given treatment.
Figure 15A shows the traces of combing curves for hair treated through a two-window
frame with a cationic conditioning agent, which is characterized by low affinity to hair in terms
of its resistance to shampooing. Unlike a conditioning treatment, shampooing is applied to the
whole tress, including untreated and conditioner-treated portions of a hair. Significant
decreases in combing forces are evident in treated sections of hair, with the effect nearly
completely eliminated by a single shampooing. In contrast to this, Figure 15B gives the traces
obtained for a high-affinity conditioning agent, showing reductions in combing works after
treatment in the window areas. The effect persists after one and two shampooings, suggesting
that the conditioning agent (Fig 15B) remains adsorbed on hair surface. Notably, combing
forces corresponding to untreated (shampooed only) portions of hair gradually increase
probably as a result of lipid removal or adsorption of anionic surfactants from a shampoo.
Other uses of this technique include the studies of the effect of chemical treatments on
hair and the analysis of hair adsorption by cationic polymers, proteins, and complexes.
TEXTURE ANALYSIS
A new tensile meter, referred to as texture analyzer can measure the force in both the
compression and tensile modes while monitoring probe displacement in relation to the sample
(Texture Technologies Corporation, Scarsdale, New York, U.S.). It was developed primarily for
quantitative characterization of food products in terms of texture parameters such as hardness,
springiness, tackiness, and resilience.
The instrument was recently adopted for conducting quantitative analysis of hair
and hair-care products by employing a procedure referred to as dynamic hairspray analysis
(Fig. 16) (86–88). It involves the use of hair samples shaped into omega loops by applying a
temporary wet set. Both the instrument and the sample are housed in a constant humidity
chamber that can maintain relative humidity in the range from 30% to 95% at ambient
temperatures. The mechanical measurements of hair loops are carried out by oscillating a
plastic probe between the fiber surface and the calibration height of a few centimeters. After
touching the surface of hair and sensing a trigger force (1–2 G), the probe produces an
additional 1- to -4-mm deformation (6–25%) of the loop before rising to the calibration
height. One-millimeter deformation is typically within the elastic limit of both untreated
and resin-modified hair. On the other hand, 4-mm deformation (25%) usually results in
irreversible breaking of polymer-fiber or polymer bonds in polymer-treated hair and is
employed to study flexibility of styling products.
Experimental data for polymer-treated hair at high deformation of 25% are presented in a
plot of force as a function of distance (Fig. 17) for the first deformation (Fig. 17A) and the first
10 consecutive deformation cycles (Fig. 17B). The data in the figures correspond to a brittle
Figure
16
The
experimental
setup to study mechanical proper-
ties of hair-care polymers. It con-
sists of a texture analyzer and an
environmental chamber. Hair sam-
ple is in the form of omega loop
placed under the probe of the tex-
ture analyzer.
Measuring Hair
725

=== Page 743 ===
polymer characterized by an elastic response in the deformation range from 0 to 1 mm. It is in
this deformation range that the ratio of modulae, E10/E1, is calculated (modulus is calculated
as the slope of the dependence of force as a function of distance in the linear portion of the
curve). E10 and E1 are the modulae of the 10th and the first deformation, respectively. The ratio
E10/E1 can be used as a measure of sample (hair treated with a polymer) flexibility. To further
characterize the flexibility of the polymer used as a hair treatment, a parameter F10/F1 can be
calculated as the ratio of the maximum force in the 10th deformation, F10, to the maximum
force in the first deformation, F1. As illustrated by the curves in Figure 17, at a deformation of
about 2 mm in the first cycle, the polymer bonds between fibers break, resulting in a reduction
of maximum force (F) in subsequent deformations. The measurements such as those presented
in Figure 17 can also be used to calculate plasticity parameter of treated hair.
By using a setup shown in Figure 16, the drying of a fixative was also investigated by
applying low (1%) intermittent deformations to o-loop shaped hair tress. First, the instrument
determined the properties of untreated hair; then, the fibers were treated with a fixative, and
the instrument measured the changes in both tackiness of a fixative solution on the hair surface
as well as mechanical stiffness of the fiber assembly as a function of drying time. The
experimental procedure yields parameters such as the stiffness of untreated and resin-
modified hair, duration of tack, maximum value of tack force, and time of drying. The kinetic
measurements of the stiffness change can also be performed at 90% RH, resulting in
information about the resistance of fixative resins to high humidity.
Other applications of this instrument include the characterization of hair (especially
ethnic hair) in terms of textural parameters, analysis of skin softness, and the measurements of
tactile properties of skin products. This new tensile meter can also be employed for the
characterization of the textural (rheological) behavior of cosmetic formulations such as
shampoos, creams, waxes, and pomades.
OPTICAL PROPERTIES AND LUSTER MEASUREMENTS
Hair luster is an important property readily assessed by a visual observation and frequently
invoked in claim substantiation and advertising. It is largely dependent on the cleanliness,
uniformity, and extent of damage to the hair surface. Hair luster can be affected by chemical
treatments that reduce hair gloss by damaging cuticles, dissolving lipids, or changing hair
Figure 17
Force as a function of deformation for hair in the form of omega loops treated with a fixative polymer.
726
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 744 ===
color. It can be also modified by application of shampoos, hair conditioners, or special shiner
formulations.
The key papers in this area were published 30 years ago by Stamm et al. (89). Recent
developments include the use of computerized goniophotometers to quantify light-scattering
effects produced by single fibers (90–95) or aligned fiber tresses (96,97). The principle behind
these measurements is the same as in earlier work: a light source illuminates the sample at an
incidence angle, and the light intensity is recorded for different receptor angles, providing a
light-scattering curve. Rotating light-scattering photometers or optical multichannel analyzers
can be employed for luster measurements.
The usual criterion of gloss is the sharpness of specular reflection, which can also be
quantified by defining various luster parameters given by the formula (90,93):
L ¼ S/D(W1/2)
where L is luster or shine, D is the integrated diffuse reflectance, S is the integrated specular
reflectance, and W1/2 is the width of a specular peak at half height.
A different experimental approach to luster measurements was taken by Maeda et al. (96)
who obtained pictures of illuminated natural hair wigs on model heads and analyzed them by
using a color image processor. The data obtained by scanning across highlighted and dark
areas could be presented in a format similar to a photogoniometric-scattering curve with the
ability to resolve reflected light into three color signals R, G, B (red, green, and blue), or L, a, b
parameters. A similar approach was taken by McMullen et al. (98,99) who employed image
analysis to measure luster of hair simulated by light reflected from a curved hair tress. Hair
samples were mounted side by side in a special sample holder in the form of a cylinder and
illuminated by a uniform beam of polarized white light. Digital images of hair tresses were
captured with a high-resolution camera and analyzed by scanning across highlighted and dark
areas of the resultant image using image analysis software. Plots, similar to goniophotometric-
scattering curves, were used to calculate luster values according to previously published work
(89,93).
By employing all these methodologies, researchers demonstrated small variations in
shine as a result of the application of shampoos with and without substantive ingredients on
untreated dark brown Asian hair (90,93). Other researchers showed the effect of special shine
formulations on damaged hair (91). Luster measurements were also employed to demonstrate
a cuticle-abrading effect of multiple combings resulting in a shift of maximum in a light-
scattering curve. Other investigations based on luster measurements documented gloss
variation between root and tip sections of hair and the effect of humidity. Nagase and
coworkers (100–101) and Okamoto et al. (102) have emphasized the importance of internal
structure of hair to optical properties and demonstrated the presence of “glittering” patches on
the hair surface caused by internal damage due to blow-drying.
Lim et al. (97) measured luster of hair tresses mounted on cylinders, similar to those
reported earlier (98), with a video camera in an experimental setup called SAMBA. The authors
did not provide the results of calculations of fundamental parameters, and the data
interpretation is given in terms of “percentage of luster increase”. It was reported that the
correlation of instrumental readings and consumer evaluation ratings of luster was good.
The image analysis procedure was employed to assess the luster of natural white, light
blonde, light brown, medium brown, and dark brown hair and revealed an increase in luster
indices in proportion to an increase in fiber pigmentation (98,99). Figure 18 presents images of
reflected light from natural white, light blonde, light brown, and dark brown hair. These
images were obtained by selecting the exposure values in such a way as to visualize the details
of the specular reflection band.
The light distribution curves are presented in Figure 19, and they are consistent with the
visual representation of the images shown in Figure 18.
For example, one can clearly see two specular reflection bands for natural white and
light blonde hair, which are evident by two peaks in the light distribution curves. The peak at
16 mm gets progressively smaller with an increase in the extent of fiber pigmentation, which
indicates that it is due to reflection from the back-face of the hair fibers. The narrowest light
distribution curve was obtained, as expected, for dark brown hair. Hair luster parameters,
calculated according to equations published by Stamm et al. (89) and Reich and Robbins (93),
are presented in Table 4.
Measuring Hair
727

=== Page 745 ===
The calculations carried out by both formulas indicate lower luster values for fibers
containing less melanin pigment, i.e., the highest luster for dark brown hair and the lowest for
natural white hair. Also, W1/2 follows the same trend, consistent with visual perception,
pointing to an increase in the width of reflected light distribution for less-pigmented fibers.
Cosmetic oils such as phenyl trimethicone, amodimethicone, and castor oil were also
found to increase luster of hair as a result of change in contrast between the specular and
diffuse reflection (98). Styling resins such as butyl ester of PVM/MA copolymer, vinyl
caprolactam/PVP/dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate copolymer, and isobutylene/ethylma-
leimide/hydroxyethylmaleimide copolymer were shown to increase hair gloss by a similar
Figure 18
Images of reflected light
from natural white, light blonde, light
brown, and dark brown hair.
Figure 19
Light distribution curves for images of hair presented in Figure 18.
Table 4
Luster Parameters for Various Hair Types
Hair type
W1/2 (mm)
LStamm
LReich-Robbins
Dark brown
5.28  0.44
0.72  0.020
0.67  0.006
Medium brown
5.44  0.16
0.72  0.006
0.67  0.005
Light brown
10.46  0.30
0.70  0.001
0.32  0.008
Light blonde
14.91  0.23
0.65  0.005
0.19  0.006
Natural white
22.78  0.24
0.32  0.013
0.06  0.002
728
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 746 ===
mechanism as evidenced by calculated higher values of Stamm and Reich–Robbins luster
parameters (98). On the other hand, an effect of hair dulling by deposition of micronized ZnO
at various concentrations as well as by synthetic sebum was also discussed (98).
African hair provided an interesting substrate for optical analysis because of the curls
that are naturally present providing multiple reflection patterns (99). It is important to note
that unlike straight hair, which exhibits one specular reflection band that coincides with the
band on the cylinder mount, homogenous illumination of African hair with a collimated light
beam results in many reflection centers of equal intensity in all regions of the sample. To
quantify the multiple reflection patterns, the authors used the image analysis software, which
allowed them to tally the number of reflection sites as well as to characterize the shape of the
reflection. Figure 20 provides images obtained for untreated hair along with hair treated with
17 and 61 mg of artificial sebum per gram of hair. Visual inspection of the images reveals a
perceived decrease in luster with increasing concentrations of sebum. Further, a decrease in
luster is coupled with a decrease in the number of reflection sites. Figure 20 includes
corresponding images in which all of the reflection sites have been isolated on a black
background using an image threshold technique. This is accomplished by looking at a
histogram corresponding to the colors present in the image and isolating the bright white light
that corresponds to the reflection centers. Image file types usually have a scale from 0 to 255 to
represent the colors in the image, with 0 representing the darkest colors (black) and 255 the
brightest (white). By isolating values that fall in the range from 225 to 250, we can look at the
brightest reflections on an entirely black background (Fig. 19), allowing us to count the total
number of reflections.
As shown in Table 5, the number of reflections decreases with increasing concentrations
of sebum, which was also clearly evident after visual inspection of Figure 19. It should also be
added that the reflection sites could be also characterized in terms of perimeter, roundness,
and compactness by using the tools of image analysis.
Figure 20
The effect of sebum on the
luster of African hair. First row shows
unprocessed images, while the second
row presents corresponding images after
image thresholding.
Table 5
Quantification of Reflection Sites on African Hair Treated with Sebum
No. of reflections
Black (%)
White (%)
Untreated
742
98.34
1.66
17 mg/g
536
99.02
0.98
61 mg/g
273
99.67
0.33
Measuring Hair
729

=== Page 747 ===
EVALUATION OF PERMANENT WAVES
Permanent waving involves breaking disulfide bonds in hair with a reducing agent followed
by reformation with a neutralizer (103,104). Evaluation of permanent waving chemistry can be
carried out either by study of reduction and reoxidation rates or by measuring the permanent
set achieved in the hair. Reduction rates in hair can either be determined by amino acid
analysis (105–107) or by methods based on chemical stress relaxation. In chemical stress
relaxation methods, a hair is stress relaxed in buffer at fixed extension until a constant level of
force is reached. Addition of a reducing agent causes the stress supported by the hair to
decrease as disulfide bonds are broken by reduction (108–113). Kinetics of the reaction can be
followed, and some information on reaction mechanisms can be deduced. Wickett (109)
introduced the term “single fiber tensile kinetics” (SFTK) to describe chemical stress relaxation.
The effect of temperature and pH on reduction with sodium thioglycolate (NaTGA) at
pH 9.0 is shown in Figure 21.
The curves from pH 9.0 at 398C and pH 10.0 at 228C clearly show the two shapes of SFTK
curves typically observed with this method. At pH 9.0, TGA follows pseudo first-order kinetics
(108,109). In this model, one assumes that the reagent is in large excess, that the reaction is slow
compared with diffusion, and that all stress supporting S-S are equally reactive. Then, the rate
of change in S–S bonds is given by
d(S–S)/dt ¼ kC0(S–S)
where C0 ¼ the concentration of reducing agent and k is the reaction rate constant. If each
S–S is assumed to support an equal amount of stress then the force, F(t), at any time t, is
given by
F(t) ¼ F(0)exp(kC0t)
And, plots of ln(F(t)/F(0) versus t will be linear with a slope of kC0.
Figure 21
(A) Effect of temperature on
SFTK reaction kinetics with NaTGA at
pH 9.0. (B) Effect of pH on NaTGA SFTK
curves at 228C. Abbreviations: SFTK, single
fiber tensile kinetics; NaTGA, sodium
thioglycolate.
730
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 748 ===
The model that fits curves shaped like those for pH 10.5, as shown in Figure 21B, is more
complex and assumes that diffusion is slower than reaction until some reaction has occurred,
greatly speeding up diffusion. In this model, there is sharp front or moving boundary of
reducing agent working its way into the hair. This model has been discussed in detail in other
papers (104,109,112).
An effective way to measure the efficacy of permanent waves is the pegboard method
(114), which is based on a uniform pegboard made of plastic that is 5.5-cm long and 1-cm wide
and contains 14 removable pegs at a height of approximately 2 cm. The distance between each
peg is about 3/10 cm. Two grams of hair are interlaced between the two peg rows without
tension and secured at each end with rubber bands (Fig. 22).
The hair must be wound evenly and smoothly without any twisting. After winding, the
hair is thoroughly saturated with waving lotion and the pegboard is covered and placed in a
constant temperature bath at 258C for a prescribed time. The pegboard is then removed from
the bottle, rinsed thoroughly with water for 30 seconds, and then saturated fully with a
neutralizer again for a prescribed time and finally rinsed with water. The rubber bands are
removed from each end, and the pegs are carefully removed. The curled hair is then immersed
in water for at least five minutes, and the length of the waved swatch is determined. Waving
efficiency is calculated as given below.
100%  [100  (B–A)/C–A] ¼ % waving efficiency
A is the distance between the first and sixth peg (2.7 cm), C is the length of straight hair (14.8 cm), r,
and B is the length of the curled hair swatch. Substituting these constants the equation becomes
100%  [100  (B–2.7)/12.1] ¼ % waving efficiency
CONCLUSION
There are a great many methods for evaluation of hair and hair-care products in the hair
cosmetics laboratory. We have reviewed several of them, but there are many that we could not
review in this chapter. The authors hope that the reader will find this review useful and
informative and apologize for the fact that some other methods were not included.
REFERENCES
1. Morris D. The Naked Ape: A Zoologist’s Study of the Human Animal. New York: Dell Publishing,
1967.
2. Robbins CR. Morphological and Macromolecular Structure. Chemical and Physical Behavior of
Human Hair. 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2002:1–62.
Figure 22
Pegboard for permanent wave evaluation.
Measuring Hair
731

=== Page 749 ===
3. Garcia ML, Epps JA, Yare RS. Normal cuticle-wear patterns in human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1978;
29:155–176.
4. Swift JA. Fine details on the surface of human hair. Int J Cosmet Sci 1991; 13:143–159.
5. Robbins CR. The physical properties and cosmetic behavior of hair. Chemical and Physical Behavior
of Human Hair. 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2002:386–473.
6. Wertz PW, Downing DT. Integral lipids of human hair. Lipids1988; 23(9):878–881.
7. Jones LN, Rivett DE. The role of 18-methyleicosanoic acid in the structure and formation of
mammalian hair fibres. Micron 1997; 28(6):469–485.
8. Negri AP, Cornell HJ, Rivett DE. A model for the surface of keratin fibers. Text Res J 1993; 63(2):109–115.
9. Cao J, Wijaya R, Leroy F. Unzipping the cuticle of the human hair shaft to obtain micron/nano
keratin filaments. Biopolymers 2006; 83(6):614–618.
10. Wickett RR, Kossmann E, Barel A, et al. Effect of oral intake of choline-stabilized orthosilicic acid
on hair tensile strength and morphology in women with fine hair. Arch Dermatol Res 2007; 299(10):
499–505.
11. Speakman JB. The rigidity of wool and its changes with adsoption of water-vapor. Trans Farady Soc
1929; 25:92–103.
12. Feughelman M. Mechanical Properties and Structure of Alpha-Keratin Fibers: Wool, Human Hair
and Related Fibers. 1st ed. Sydney: USNW Press, 1997.
13. Feughelman M. A two phase structure for keratin fibers. Text Res J 1959; 29:223–228.
14. Feughelman M, Robinson MS. Some mechanical properties of wool fibers in the “Hookean” region
from zero to 100% relative humidity. Textile Res J 1971; 41:469.
15. Feughelman M. Mechanical properties of wool fibres & the two-phase model. Mechanical Properties
and structure of alpha-keratin fibers: Wool Human Hair and Related Fibers. Sydney: USNW Press,
1997:28–59.
16. Fraser RD, Parry DA. Macrofibril assembly in trichocyte (hard alpha-) keratins. J Struct Biol 2003;
142(2):319–325.
17. Fraser RD, Parry DA. The three-dimensional structure of trichocyte (hard alpha-) keratin intermediate
filaments: features of the molecular packing deduced from the sites of induced crosslinks. J Struct Biol
2005; 151(2):171–181.
18. Fraser RD, Parry DA. The three-dimensional structure of trichocyte (hard alpha-) keratin
intermediate filaments: the nature of the repeating unit. J Struct Biol 2006; 155(2):375–378.
19. Wilk KE, James VJ, Amemiya Y. The intermediate filament structure of human hair. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1995; 1245(3):392–396.
20. Rogers MA, Langbein L, Praetzel-Wunder S, et al. Human hair keratin-associated proteins (KAPs).
Int Rev Cytol 2006; 251:209–263.
21. Feughelman M. The physical properties of alpha keratin fibers. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1982; 33:385–406.
22. Bendit EG. The a-b transformation in keratin. Nature(London) 1957; 179:535.
23. Burte H, Halsey G. A new theory of non-linear viscoelasticity. Textile Res J 1947; 17:465.
24. Hu L. Heat Damage to Hair. University of Cincinnati, College of Pharmacy, 1996;
25. Kamath YK, Hornby SB, Weigmann HD. Mechanical and fractographic behavior of negroid hair.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1984; 35:21.
26. Cannell DW, Carothers LE. Permanent waving:utilization of the post-yield slope as a formulation
parameter. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1978; 29:685.
27. Feughelman M. The mechanical properties of permanently set and cystine reduced wool fibers at
various relative humidities and the structure of wool. Textile Res J 1963; 33:1013.
28. Feughelman M. The post-yield region and the structure of keratin. Textile Res J 1964; 34:539.
29. Beyak R, Meyer CF, Kass GS. Elasticity and tensile properties of human hair I. Single fiber test
method. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1969; 20:615.
30. Wickett RR. Measuring the mechanical strength of hair. In: Serup J, Jemec BE, eds. Handbook of
Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995:535–541.
31. CL Gummer, Automated tensile testing of hair, 10th International Hair Science Symposium,
Rostock, 1996.
32. Tate ML, Kamath YK, Ruetsch SB, et al. Quantification and prevention of hair damage. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1993; 44:347–372.
33. Robbins CR, Crawford RJ. Cuticle damage and tensile properties of human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem
1991; 42:59.
34. Gamez-Garcia M. Effects of some oils, emulsions and other aqueous systems on the mechanical
properties of hair at small deformations. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1993; 44:69–88.
35. Swift JA. The mechanics of fracture of human hair. Int J Cosmet Sci 1999; 21:227–239.
36. Swift JA. Hair strength and the relevance of the flexabrasion test, 13th International Hair Science
Symposium, Potsdam, Sept 2003.
37. Persaud D, Kamath YK. Torsional method for evaluating hair damage and performance of hair care
ingredients. J Cosmet Sci 2004; 55(suppl):S65–S77.
732
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 750 ===
38. Bogaty H. Torsional properties of hair in relation to permanent waving and setting. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1967; 18:575–589.
39. Harper DL, Kamath YK. The effect of treatments on the shear modulus of human hair measured by
the single fiber torsion pendulum. J Cosmet Sci 2007; 58(4):329–337.
40. Wolfram LJ, Albrecht L. Torsional behavior of human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1985; 36:87–100.
41. Yasuda.Physical properties of hair: evaluation and a mechanism of bending and torsional Stress,
13th International Hair Science Symposium, Potsdam, Sept 2003.
42. Scott GV, Robbins CR. Stiffness of human hair fibers. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1978; 29:469.
43. Savenije EPW, De Vos R. Mechanical properties of human beard hair. Bioeng Skin 1986; 2:215.
44. Wortmann FJ, Kure N. Bending relaxation properties of human hair and permanent waving
performance. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1990; 41:123–139.
45. Pande C, Jachowicz J. Hair photodamage – measurement and prevention. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1993;
44:109.
46. Pande C, Tryptophan fluorescence in hair. 9th International Hair Science Symposium, Prien, 1990.
47. Jachowicz J, Locke B, McMullen R. Spectroscopic analysis of photo and thermal degradation of hair,
13th Latin American and Iberian Cosmetic Chemists Congress and IFSCC International Conference,
Acapulco. Sept 1997.
48. Bramanti E, Ronca F, Todori L, et al. A new approach to the study of hair by means of FT-IR
microspectroscopy. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1992; 43(6):285–296.
49. Pande CM, Yang B. FT-Raman spectroscopy: applications in hair research. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1994;
45:257.
50. Tanaka S, Limura H, Sugiyama T. Study of the test method of reduction and recovery of disulfide
bond in human hair, J Soc Cosmet Chem (Japan) 1992; 25(4):232–239.
51. Ozaki Y, Miura M, Sakurai K, et al. Nondestructive analysis of water structure and content in animal
tissues by FT-NIR spectroscopy with light fiber optics. Part I: Human hair. Appl Spectrosc 1992; 46(5):
875–878.
52. Pande CM, Yang B. Near-infrared spectroscopy: applications in hair research. J Cosmet Sci 2000;
51:183–192.
53. Bendit EG, Fueghelman M. Keratin. Encylopedia of Polymer Science and Technology. New York:
John Wiley and Son, 1968:1.
54. Feughelman M. Introduction to the physical properties of wool, hair & other -keratin fibers.
Mechanical Properties and structure of alpha-keratin fibers: Wool Human Hair and Related Fibers.
Sydney: USNW Press, 1997:1–14.
55. A. Franbourg. Synchrotron light: a powerful tool for the analysis of human hair damage, 10th
International Hair Science Symposium, Rostock. 1996.
56. Goldberg IB, Bard AJ. Electron spin resonance spectroscopy. In: Elving PJ, Bursey MM, Kolthoff IM,
eds. Treatise on Analytical Chemistry. Part I Theory and Practice, Vol. 10. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1999:225.
57. Prota G. Melanins and Melanogenesis. New York: Academic Press, 1992.
58. Kirchenbaum LJ, Qu X, Borish ET. Oxygen radicals from photoirradiated human hair: an ESR and
fluorescence study. J Cosmet Sci 2000; 51:169–182.
59. O’Connor SD, Komisarek KL, Baldeschwieler JD. Atomic force microscopy of human hair cuticles:
a microscopic study of environmental effects on hair morphology. J Invest Dermatol 1995; 105(1):
96–99.
60. Goddard ED, Schmitt RL. Atomic force microscopy investigation into the adsorption of cationic
polymers. Cosmetics and Toiletries 1994; 109(3):55–61.
61. Schmitt RL, Goddard ED. Atomic force microscopy (part ii): investigation into the adsorption of
cationic polymers. Cosmetics and Toiletries 1994; 109(12):83–93.
62. Smith JR. Use of Atomic Force Microscopy for high resolution non-invasive structural studies of
human hair, J Soc Cosmet Chem 1997; 48:199–209.
63. Smith JR. A quantitative method for analysing AFM images of the outer surfaces of human hair.
J Microsc 1998; 191(3):223–228.
64. McMullen RL, Jachowicz J, Kelty SP. Correlation of AFM/LFM with combing forces of human hair.
IFSCC Magazine 2000; 3(3):39–45.
65. Smith JR. Calculation of cuticle step heights from AFM images of outer surfaces of human hair.
Methods Mol Biol 2004; 242:95–104.
66. Swift JA, Smith JR. Atomic force microscopy of human hair. Scanning 2000; 22(5):310–318.
67. Bhushan B, Chen N. AFM studies of environmental effects on nanomechanical properties and
cellular structure of human hair. Ultramicroscopy 2006; 106(8–9):755–764.
68. Swift JA, Allen AK. Swelling of human hair by water, 8th International Hair Science Symposium,
Kiel, 1992.
69. Corcuff P, Gremillet P, Jourlin M, et al. 3D reconstruction of human hair by confocal microscopy.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1993; 44:1–12.
Measuring Hair
733

=== Page 751 ===
70. Weigmann HD, Kamath YK, Ruetsch SB, et al. Characterization of surface deposits on human hair
fibers. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1990; 41:379–390.
71. Jachowicz J, Berthiaume M. Microemulsions versus macroemulsions in hair care products.
Cosmetics and Toiletries 1993; 108(3):65.
72. Jachowicz J, Williams C, Maxey S. Sorption/Desorption of ions by dynamic electrokinetic and
permeability analysis of fiber plugs. Langmuir 1993; 9(11):3085.
73. Jachowicz J, William C. Figerprinting of cosmetic formulations by dynamic electrokinetic and
permeability analysis: I Shampoos. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1994; 45(6):309–336.
74. Jachowicz J. The effect of reactive treatments on hair by dynamic electrokinetic and permeability
analysis. 10th International Hair Science Symposium, Prien, 1994.
75. Jachowicz J. Fingerprinting of cosmetic formulations by dynamic electrokinetic and permeability
analysis. II. Hair conditioners. J Soc Cosmet Chem 2008; 46(2):100–116.
76. Kamath Y, Dansizer CJ, Weigmann HD. Wetting behavior of human hair fibers. J Appl Polym Sci
1978; 22:2295.
77. Kamath YK, Dansizer CJ, Hornby SB, et al. Surface wettability scanning of long filaments by a liquid
membrane method. Text Res J 1987; 57:205.
78. Sauermann G, Hoppe U, Lunderstadt R, et al. Measurement of the surface profile of human hair by
surface profilometry. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1988; 39(1):27–42.
79. Zielinski M. A new approach to hair surface topography: fourier transform and fractal analysis. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1989; 40(3):173–190.
80. Newman W, Cohen GL, Hayes C. A quantitative characterization of combing forces. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1973; 24(13):773–782.
81. Tolgyesi WS, Cottington E, Fookson A. Mechanics of Hair Combing, presented at the Symposium on
Mechanics of Fibrous Structures, Fiber Society, May 1975.
82. Garcia ML, Diaz J. Combability measurements on human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1976; 27(9):379–398.
83. Kamath YK, Weigmann HD. Measurement of combing forces. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1986; 37:111–124.
84. Rocafort C, Alexander A, Chaudhuri RK, et al. Photodegradation of hair and its photoprotection by a
substantive photofilter. Drug Cosmet Ind 1995; 12:28.
85. Jachowicz J, Helioff M. Spatially resolved combing analysis. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1997; 48(2):93–106.
86. Jachowicz J, Yao K. Dynamic Hair Spray Analysis I. Instrumentation and preliminary results. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1996; 47(2):73–84.
87. Jachowicz J, Yao K. Dynamic hairspray analysis. II. Effect of polymer, hair type, and solvent
composition. J Cosmet Sci 2001; 52(5):281–295.
88. Jachowicz J. Dynamic hairspray analysis. III. Theoretical considerations. J Cosmet Sci 2002; 53(5):
249–261.
89. Stamm RF, Garcia ML, Fuchs JJ. The optical properties of human hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:571.
90. Bustard HK, Smith RW. Studies of factors affecting light scattering by individual human hair fibers.
Int J Cosmet Sci 1993; 12:121.
91. Czepluch W, Holm G, Tolkeihn K. Gloss of hair surfaces: problems of visual evaluation and
possibilities for goniophotometric measurements of treated strands. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1993; 44:
299–319.
92. Guilote A, Garson JC, Leveque JL. Study of the optical properties of human hair. Int J Cosmet Sci
1987; 9(3):111–124.
93. Reich C, Robbins CR. Light scattering and shine measurement of human hair: a sensitve probe of the
hair surface. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1993; 44:221–234.
94. Wortmann FJ, Schulze zur WE, Bourceau B. Analyzing the laser-light reflection from human hair
fibers. II. Deriving a measure of hair luster. J Cosmet Sci 2004; 55(1):81–93.
95. Wortmann FJ, Schulze zur WE, Bierbaum A. Analyzing the laser-light reflection from human hair
fibers. I. Light components underlying the goniophotometric curves and fiber cuticle angles. J Cosmet
Sci 2003; 54(3):301–316.
96. Maeda T, Hara T, Okada M, et al. Measurements of hair luster by color image analysis, Preprints
from 16th IFSCC Congress in New York in 1990, Vol. 1:127.
97. Lim JM, Chang MY, Park ME, et al. A study correlating between instrumental and consumers’
subjective luster values in oriental hair tresses. J Cosmet Sci 2006; 57(6):475–485.
98. McMullen R, Jachowicz J. Optical properties of hair: effect of treatments on luster as quantified by
image analysis. J Cosmet Sci 2003; 54(4):335–351.
99. McMullen R, Jachowicz J. Optical properties of hair–detailed examination of specular reflection
patterns in various hair types. J Cosmet Sci 2004; 55(1):29–47.
100. Nagase S, Shibuichi S, Ando K, et al. Influence of internal structures of hair fiber on hair appearance. I.
Light scattering from the porous structure of the medulla of human hair. J Cosmet Sci 2002; 53(2):
89–100.
101. Nagase S, Satoh N, Nakamura K. Influence of internal structure of hair fiber on hair appearance. II.
Consideration of the visual perception mechanism of hair appearance. J Cosmet Sci 2002; 53(6): 387–402.
734
Wickett and Jemec

=== Page 752 ===
102. Okamoto M, Yakawa R, Mamada A, et al. Influence of internal structures of hair fiber on hair
appearance. III. Generation of light-scattering factors in hair cuticles and the influence on hair shine.
J Cosmet Sci 2003; 54(4):353–366.
103. Albrecht L, Wolfram LJ. Mechanism of hair waving. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1982; 33:363–366.
104. Wickett RR, Savaides A. Permanent waving of hair. In: Schlossman M, ed. Chemistry and
Manufacture of Cosmetics Volume II, Formulating., Carol Stream, Il: Allured Publishing, 2001:511–534.
105. Gumprecht JG, Patel K, Bono RP. Effectiveness of reduction and oxidation in acid and alkaline
permanent waving. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1977; 28:717–732.
106. Manuszak MA, Borish ET, Wickett RR. A study of the reduction of human hair by cysteamine and
ammonium thioglycolate – Correlation of Amino Acid Analysis and single fiber tensile kinetic data.
J Soc Cosmet Chem 1996; 47:213–228.
107. Said HM, Feige AJ, Newsom AE, et al. The microfibrillar proteins of human hair: separation by high-
performance liquid chromatography and isolation of some proteins enriched in glycine and tyrosine.
Anal Biochem 1987; 165(1):161–166.
108. Reese C, Eyring H. Mechanical properties and the structure of hair. Textile Res J 1950; 20:743.
109. Wickett RR. Kinetic studies of hair reduction using a single fiber technique. J Soc Cosmet Chem 1983;
34:301–316.
110. Wickett RR, Barman BG. Factors affecting the kinetics of disulfide bond reduction in hair. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1985; 36:75–86.
111. Wickett RR, Mermelstein R. Single fiber stress decay studies of hair reduction and depilation. J Soc
Cosmet Chem 1986; 37:461–473.
112. Wickett RR. Disulfide bond reduction in permanent waving. Cosmet Toiletr 1991; 106(7):37–47.
113. Wortmann FJ, Souren I. Extensional properties of human hair and permanent waving. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1986; 37:461–473.
114. Kirby DH. A method for determining the waving efficacy of cold permanent wave lotion. Proc Sci
Sec Toilet Goods Assc 1956; 26:12.
Measuring Hair
735

=== Page 754 ===
69
The Normal Nail
Josette Andre´
Department of Dermatology, Centres Hospitaliers Universitaires Saint-Pierre & Brugmann, and Ho^pital
Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
ANATOMY
The nail plate, also abbreviated as “nail,” is a hard keratin plate, slightly convex in the
longitudinal and the transverse axes. It is set in the soft tissues of the dorsal digital extremity,
from which it is separated by the periungual grooves (proximal, lateral, and distal) (Fig. 1)
(1–5). It stems from the nail matrix located in the proximal part of the nail apparatus. The nail
plate and matrix are partly covered by a skin fold called “the proximal nail fold” (PNF). The
lunula, also known as “half-moon,” is a whitish crescent, visible at the proximal part of some
nails and more specifically those of the thumbs and big toes. It corresponds to the distal part of
the matrix. From the latter, the nail plate grows toward the distal region sliding along the nail
bed to which it adheres closely and from which it only separates at the distal part, called
“hyponychium.” The latter and overhanging free nail provides a crevice, which is a reservoir
for microbes.
Two other structures deserve our attention:
1.
The cuticle, which is the transparent horny layer of the proximal nail groove, adheres
to the nail surface and acts as a seal between the nail plate and the PNF. Its disruption
allows water, foreign bodies, bacteria, and fungi to penetrate under the PNF, which
favors paronychia (periungual inflammation).
2.
The onychodermal band or better known as the onychocorneal band, which is
“orangey,” is located in the distal region of the nail. It can be partly blanched by
pressure, thus exsanguinating the region. It provides a zone of rugged attachment of
the nail-to-nail bed. As for the cuticle, disruption of the onychocorneal attachment
will severely affect the nail function, leading to onycholysis (detachment of the nail
from its bed).
The upper surface of the nail plate is smooth and has discrete longitudinal ridges
becoming more obvious with age (Fig. 2) and in some pathological states. This is a frequent
cause of nail brittleness.
The under surface is corrugated with parallel longitudinal grooves that interdigitate with
the opposite ones of the nail bed surface, enhancing the adhesion of the nail plate to the nail
bed. The most important adhesion is located in the distal, central part of the nail.
HISTOLOGY
The Nail Plate
The nail plate is made up of parallel layers of keratinized, flat, and completely differentiated
cells, called “onychocytes.” The latter are, in contrast with the corneocytes, firmly adherent and
not desquamated. Nuclear remnants can be observed, but they disappear completely, near the
distal free edge.
Three zones (characterized by different staining affinities) can be identified at the distal
part of the nail: the upper (or dorsal) nail plate, which makes up one-third of the nail; the lower
nail plate, which makes up two-thirds of the nail; and the subungual keratin. The latter
corresponds to the thick, dense, horny layer of the hyponychium (Fig. 3) (6,7).
In electron microscopy (Fig. 4) (8), the nail plate cells appear to be made of a regular weft
of keratin filaments within an interfilamentous matrix. In the upper (or dorsal) nail plate, cells
are flat, their cellular membranes are discreetly indented, and they are separated from each
other by ampullar dilatations. At the surface, those cells are piled up like roof tiles, which give

=== Page 755 ===
the nail surface its smooth aspect. In the lower nail plate, cells are thicker, their cellular
membranes are anfractuous, and they interpenetrate through extensions, making real
anchoring knots that seem to be partly responsible for nail elasticity.
Recently, the histological structure of the nail plate has also been studied by synchrotron
X-ray microdiffraction (9). Three transversal layers (characterized by different orientations of
Figure 2
Obvious longitudinal ridges on the nail surface
noticed in older people.
Figure 1
The normal nail: (1) nail plate, (2) nail grooves
[(2A) proximal nail groove, (2B) lateral nail groove, (2C) distal
nail groove], (3) proximal nail fold, (4) lunula, (5) cuticle, (6)
onychodermal band. Small dots represent the stratum
granulosum. Abbreviation: H, hyponychium.
738
Andre´

=== Page 756 ===
the keratin molecules) are also identified. The outer or dorsal nail plate, which makes up the one-
fourth of the nail, contains epidermal-type keratin filaments, perpendicular or parallel to the nail
growth axis. The intermediate nail plate, accounting for approximately two-thirds of the nail, is
the only one containing hairlike type a-keratin filaments, perfectly orientated perpendicularly to
the growth axis. The very thin (one-twelfth of the nail plate only), ventral nail plate is made up of
epidermal type keratin filaments, perpendicular or parallel to the nail growth axis.
In the latter study (9), and in those previously mentioned, it should be pointed out that
the denominations given to the three parts of the nail are different, which could lead to
confusion. In Figure 5, the correspondence between the different terms used is shown.
Other Nail Structures
A longitudinal section of the nail apparatus enables us to visualize most characteristics of the
other ungual structures (Fig. 1). From the proximal to the distal region, the following are
identified:
l The PNF (Fig. 6). Its dorsal part is in continuity with the epidermis of the digit back. Its
vascularization is noticeable. The capillary loops are parallel to the skin surface, which
allows their in vivo examination, under a special microscope with epi-illumination.
Figure 3
Longitudinal section of the
distal part of the nail apparatus: (1)
upper or dorsal nail plate, (2) lower nail
plate, (3) subungual keratin. Abbrevia-
tions: H, hyponychium; DG, distal groove.
Figure 4
Schematic drawing of the cell membranes in the dorsal and ventral part of the nail plate, as observed
in electron microscopic examination. Source: From Ref. 8.
The Normal Nail
739

=== Page 757 ===
This technique, called “capillaroscopy,” is useful in the diagnosis of Raynaud’s
phenomenon and connective tissue diseases. The ventral part of the PNF is a flat and
rather thin epithelium that keratinizes with a stratum granulosum (SG). The latter can
disappear in the most proximal part of the PNF that is the proximal matrix. The cuticle
corresponds to the modified stratum corneum (SC) of the distal part of the PNF, at the
angle of the dorsal and the ventral part.
l The nail matrix is a multilayered epithelium. Its keratinization process is characterized
by an onychogenous zone devoid of keratohyaline granules (Fig. 6). It gives birth to the
nail plate: the proximal part of the matrix gives birth to its dorsal part and the distal
part of the matrix to its ventral part. Immunohistochemical studies have shown that
the nail matrix epithelium is the sole site of hard keratin synthesis (10).
The epithelium of the matrix also contains melanocytes and Langerhans cells.
Melanocytes are about 200/mm2 in number (about 1150/mm2 in the epidermis). Most of
Figure 5
Nail Plate in Transversal Section.
Figure 6
Longitudinal section of the prox-
imal part of the nail apparatus. A stratum
granulosum (arrows) is present in the dorsal
and ventral part of the proximal nail fold
epithelium but is absent in the matrix epithe-
lium. Abbreviations: PNF, proximal nail fold;
C, cuticle; NP, nail plate; M, matrix.
740
Andre´

=== Page 758 ===
them are dormant (11) and do not produce pigment. However, in dark-skinned individuals,
longitudinal pigmented bands can be observed in nails. This racial physiological pigmentation
is attributable to the activation of the matrix melanocytes and to the melanin incorporation in
the nail plate (longitudinal melanonychia). It usually affects several nails and tends to become
more frequent with aging; this can only be observed in 2.5% of newborn to 3-year-old black
children, but in 96% of blacks older than 50 years (Fig. 7) (12).
l The nail bed epithelium is thin, reduced to few cellular layers. It keratinizes without
any granular layer. The SG reappears only at the hyponychium, which represents the
distal thickened part of the nail bed and is bordered by the distal groove and the
digital pulp (Fig. 3).
Melanocytes are rare (47/mm2) or may be absent in the nail bed (11).
From an immunohistological point of view, the nail bed is distinguished by the
expression of basal keratin markers throughout the epithelium thickness and absence of
markers of epidermis or mucosal differentiation. It has been suggested that the nail plate could
act as a suprabasal layer for the nail bed. Additionally, expression of keratin 17, which is
usually found with myoepithelial differentiation and epithelial mobility, could play a role in
the sliding of the nail plate over the nail bed (10).
Finally, strong expression of a carcinoembryonic family antigen has also been described
in the upper epithelial cell layers of the major central portions of the nail bed. It may play a part
in the adhesion of the nail plate to the nail bed (13).
l The basal membrane of the nail apparatus is almost identical to that of the skin (14).
l The nail matrix and nail bed mesenchyme (dermis) does not contain pilosebaceous units.
In the distal matrix, the connective tissue is loose and edematous. In the proximal matrix
and the nail bed, it is characterized by dense collagen bundles, vertically orientated
linking the nail apparatus to the periosteum. Elastic fibers are rare; eccrine sweat glands
are usually absent. Glomus bodies, which are specialized arteriovenous anastomosis
involved in the regulation of temperature, can also be observed in the dermis. In
pathology, they give rise to glomus tumors, characteristically associated with paroxysmal
pain. They represent one of the most frequent benign tumors of the nail apparatus.
l No genuine hypodermis is present in the nail but some adipose islets can be observed (7).
PHYSICOCHEMISTRY
The nail is highly rich in keratins, especially in hard keratins, which are close to those of
hair and have a high content of disulfide linkage (cystine) (1,3). The high sulfur-containing
keratins play an important role in the nail toughness and presumably in its good barrier
property as well.
Figure 7
Multiple longitudinal melanonychia in an adult black
patient.
The Normal Nail
741

=== Page 759 ===
Sulfur represents 10% of the nail’s dry weight; calcium represents 0.1% to 0.2%. The
latter, contrary to conventional wisdom, does not intervene in the nail toughness.
Lipid content (particularly cholesterol) is low in nails: from 0.1% to 1% compared with
10% in the SC of the skin.
Water concentration varies from 7% to 12% (15–25% in the SC), but the nail is highly
permeable to water: when its hydration level increases, it becomes soft and opaque, and when
its hydration level drops, it becomes dry and brittle.
Studies carried on nail permeability are important for the development of cosmetic and
pharmaceutical products specifically devoted to nails (15). As a permeation barrier, it has been
shown that the nail plate reacts like a hydrogel membrane, unlike the epidermis that reacts like
a lipophilic membrane (16).
The normal nail is hard, flexible, and elastic, which gives good resistance to the
microtraumatisms it undergoes daily. Those properties are attributable to the following factors:
the regular arrangement and important adhesion of onychocytes, the anchoring knots, the high
sulfur-containing keratins and their regular orientation, and the hydration level of the nail.
PHYSIOLOGY
The nail growth is continuous. In a month, fingernails grow about 3 mm and toenails grow
about 1 mm. A complete renewal, therefore, takes four to six months for normal fingernails,
whereas 12 to 18 months are needed for toenails (1,3).
The origin of the nail plate production is still a debatable point. However, most studies
agree and show that at least 80% of the nail plate is produced by the matrix. Indeed, studies
based on cell kinetics, realized on squirrel monkey (17) or on human nails, (18) showed a cell
proliferation largely limited to the matrix. This was further supported by later immunohis-
tochemical markers of epidermal proliferation (19).
Finally, the use of keratin antibodies showing the production of hard keratin restricted to
the matrix, matches the notion that the bulk of the nail plate derives from the matrix (10). It
should be added that the main source of nail plate production is the proximal part of the
matrix, 80% of nail plate cells being generated within the proximal 50% of the matrix. This
probably explains why distal matrix surgery or nail bed surgery have a low potential for
scarring compared with proximal matrix surgery (19).
Some studies suggest that the nail bed produces 20% of the nail plate, whereas others
suggest that the nail bed hardly participates in the making of the nail plate (19,20).
It is not totally excluded that the ventral part of the PNF on the one hand, and the nail
bed on the other, could contribute to the dorsal and ventral part of the nail plate, respectively,
where soft keratin is observed.
ESTHETICS
For centuries, the nail has played an important esthetic role. Having clean nails is essential to
looking well groomed and refined, and among women nails also need to be long and painted.
A “good-looking nail” has a smooth and shiny surface. It is transparent and adheres to its
bed. Regarding the proximal groove, the cuticle has to be intact and thin. The distal and the
lateral grooves have to be clean and the periungual tissues must be without hangnails and
sores. The free border has to be smooth; its shape can be round, pointed, oval, or square.
Women often wear long fingernails cut oval, which makes fingers look longer and thinner. Yet,
square nails are in fashion. Too long nails can look unpleasant and can even be a nuisance.
Men wear short fingernails cut square. Both women and men have short toenails cut
square. A normal nail structure and appropriate cosmetic care are necessary to obtain such
“good-looking” nails.
REFERENCES
1. Dawber RPR, de Berker DAR, Baran R. Science of the nail apparatus. In: Baran R, Dawber RPR, de
Berker DAR, eds. Diseases of the Nails and Their Management. 3rd ed. Oxford: Blackwell Science,
2001:1–47.
742
Andre´

=== Page 760 ===
2. Gonza´lez-Serva A. Structure and function. In: Scher RK, Daniel CR, eds. Nails: Therapy, Diagnosis,
and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company, 1990:11–30.
3. Fleckman PH. Basic science of the nail unit. In: Scher RK, Daniel CR, eds. Nails: Therapy, Diagnosis,
and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company, 1990:36–51.
4. Morgan AM, Baran R, Haneke E. Anatomy of the nail unit in relation to the distal digit. In: Krull EA,
Zook EG, Baran R, eds. Nail Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2001:1–28.
5. Zais N. Anatomy and physiology. In: Zaias N, ed. The Nail in Health and Disease. 2nd ed. Norwalk:
Appleton & Lange, 1990:3–14.
6. Achten G, Andre´ J, Laporte M. Nails in light and electron microscopy. Semin Dermatol 1991; 10:54–64.
7. Perrin CH. Anatomie microscopique de l’appareil ungue0al. Histologie et histopathologie. In: Dumontier
CH, ed. L’Ongle. Paris: Elsevier, 2000:19–28.
8. Parent D, Achten G, Stouffs-Vanhoof F. Ultrastructure of the normal human nail. Am J Dermatopathol
1985; 7:529–535.
9. Garson JC, Baltenneck F, Leroy F, et al. Histological structure of human nail as studied by synchrotron
X-ray microdiffraction. Cell Mol Biol 2000; 46:1025–1034.
10. de Berker D, Wojnarowska F, Sviland L, et al. Keratin expression in the normal nail unit: markers of
regional differentiation. Br J Dermatol 2000; 142:89–96.
11. Perrin CH, Michiels JF, Pisani A, et al. Anatomic distribution of melanocytes in normal nail unit: an
immunohistochemical investigation. Am J Dermatopathol 1997; 19:462–467.
12. Leyden JJ, Spott DA, Goldschmidt H. Diffuse and banded melanin pigmentation in nails. Arch
Dermatol 1972; 105:548–550.
13. Egawa K, Kuroki M, Inoue Y, et al. Nail bed keratinocytes express an antigen of the carcinoembryonic
antigen family. Br J Dermatol 2000; 143:79–83.
14. Sinclair RD, Wojnarowska F, Leigh IM, et al. The basement membrane zone of the nail. Br J Dermatol
1994; 131:499–505.
15. Sun Y, Liu J-C, Wang JCT, et al. Nail penetration : focus on topical delivery of antifungal drugs for
onychomycosis treatment. In: Bronaugh RL, Maibach HI, eds.Percutaneous Absorption. Drugs-
Cosmetics-Mechanisms-Methodology. 3rd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1999:759–778.
16. Mertin D, Lippold BC. In vitro permeability of the human nail and of a keratin membrane from
bovine hooves: influence of the partition coeficient octanol/water and the water solubility of drugs on
their permeability and maximum flux. J Pharm Pharmacol 1997; 49:30–34.
17. Zaias N, Alvarez J. The formation of the primate nail plate: an autoradiographic study in the squirrel
monkey. J Invest Dermatol 1968; 51:120–136.
18. Norton LA. Incorporation of thymidin-methyl-H3 and glycin-2-H3 in the nail matrix and bed of
humans. J Invest Dermatol 1971; 56:61–68.
19. de Berker D, Mawhinney B, Sviland L. Quantification of regional matrix nail production. Br J
Dermatol 1996; 134:1083–1086.
20. Johnson M, Shuster S. Continuous formation of nail along the bed. Br J Dermatol 1993; 128:277–280.
The Normal Nail
743

=== Page 762 ===
70
Nail Cosmetics: Handle of Skin Care
Josette Andre´
Department of Dermatology, Centres Hospitaliers Universitaires Saint-Pierre & Brugmann, and Hoˆpital
Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
Robert Baran
Nail Disease Centre, Cannes, France
THE MANICURE
The art of manicure is very ancient as can be testified by the Egyptian tomb of Niankhkhnum
and Khnumhotep, dated approximately 2400
BC. It was discovered in the necropolis of
Saqqarah in 1964. It is the tomb of two manicurist men who seem to have played an important
role. Indeed, they were “Manicurist and Overseer of the Manicurists in the Palace, King’s
Acquaintance and Royal Confidant” (King Niouserreˆ, 5th dynasty, ancient empire) (1).
Nail Polish Remover
Currently, a professional manicure is made up of several steps (2):
The first one consists of removing any nail enamel remaining on the nail plate from a
previous application. To do so, a cotton ball soaked with nail polish remover is used (Fig. 1).
Nail enamel removers dissolve nitrocellulose and remove lipids from the nail plate. They
mainly contain a mixture of organic solvents, with small amounts of oils added to counteract
the drying effect of the solvents.
Typical formula (3):
l Solvents (ca. 98%)—Example: acetone, butyl or ethyl acetate, ethoxyethanol.
l Lipids (ca. 2%)—Example: castor oil, lanolin oil.
Other additives can also be found such as dyes, fragrances, preservatives, vitamins, and
UV absorbers.
Nail polish removers should not be used more than once a week and should not be left
too long in contact with the nails and the skin. Correctly used, they most probably do not cause
nail brittleness (4).
Marketing usually insists on the fast action of the product, which is usually true. Nail
polish removers specifically for brittle nails are also marketed. These are mainly nail polish
removers without acetone. Actually, they are not better but are odorless.
Some varnish removers for brittle nails have a different composition, for example, on the
basis of an ethoxy-diglycol solution, containing a mercapto-silanol complex (Si-nails remover1).
This latter is purported to penetrate into the nail and to reinforce the disulfide linkage of the
keratin. There is a lack in scientific studies, and the necessary time to remove the varnish is longer.
Cutting, Filing, Pumicing
Next, the nail is given the desired length, shape, and surface.
Therefore, the nail is cut and filed (Fig. 2). Filing is known to be less traumatic. This is
probably only true when bad quality nail clippers are used.
If the nail surface is irregular, it can be trimmed, but not too much, to avoid nail plate
thinning. This would be a source of nail brittleness.
Afterwards, the periungual grooves and folds are taken care of.
The nails are bathed in lukewarm, slightly soapy water. This cleans and softens the
periungual tissue.
Cuticle Removers (5)
The cuticle is then covered with cuticle removers, which can be a liquid, gel, or cream. They
usually contain sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide, in a 2% to 5% concentration.

=== Page 763 ===
a-Hydroxyacids (1–5% lactic acid, pH 3–3.7) are also used. They attack keratin by disruption of
the disulfide bonds of cystine. Cuticle removers contain various additives: emollients (lanolin)
or humectants (glycerin, propylene glycol) whose purpose is to decrease evaporation, increase
viscosity, and reduce irritation. Preservatives, perfumes, and thickening agents can also be
added.
Typical formula (3):
l Water (ca. 90%)
l Softening agent (1–5 %)—Example: potassium hydroxide
l Thickener (0.5–1 %)—Example: sorbitol, magnesium aluminum silicate
l Perfume (0.1%)
The cuticle remover increases the softening of the cuticle and of the cuticle remnants,
which adhere to the nail plate surface. These are then gently pushed back with an orangewood
stick covered with cotton or a rubber-ended stick (Fig. 3). Of course, the goal of this step is not
to destroy the cuticle, which is a very important seal between the proximal nail fold (PNF) and
the nail plate. Its destruction can lead to paronychia (periungual inflammation). Inexperienced
rough handling of the cuticle may also injure the matrix below.
Figure 1
Nail polish removal.
Figure 2
Nail plate filing.
746
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 764 ===
The distal and lateral nail grooves are cleaned. It is most important to avoid
overaggressive cleaning beneath the free edge of the nail, which can lead to onycholysis
(detachment of the nail plate from the nail bed).
Finally, hang nails are cut with a special nipper (Fig. 4).
The manicure ends with a moisturising cream massage of the nails and the hands.
Buffing and Whitening
Other treatments are more rarely used: an abrasive powder, paste, or cream (stannic oxide,
talc, silica, chalk, kaolin) (2) can be applied on the nail surface, which is then buffed with
chamois leather. This produces a smooth and shiny nail surface, appreciated by women who
do not wish to wear nail polish.
The undersurface of the nail can be painted with a whitening pencil, of which the core is
kaolin, to reinforce the whiteness of the free edge.
Daily Care
Products are also marketed for daily use, which are to be used between manicures.
Cuticle softeners are not to be confused with cuticle removers. They are simply emollients
to which quaternary ammonium compounds or urea are sometimes added to promote
softening of the cuticles (2). These latter can then be gently reversed with the fingers.
Creams for brittle nails contain phospholipids. They are best applied after moistening the
nail plate. Indeed, when a nail has been hydrated by immersion, phospholipids prevent
dehydration, maintaining and increasing nail flexibility (6). Creams containing mandelic acid
Figure 3
Rubber-ended stick, to push
back the cuticle remnants.
Figure 4
Hangnails are cut with a
special nipper.
Nail Cosmetics
747

=== Page 765 ===
are also marketed; in contrast to most a-hydroxyacid, mandelic acid would cause thickening
in keratin.
Unwanted Effects of Manicure (7,8)
Unwanted effects in the nail area can mainly be attributed to technical errors. An overzealous
manicure is likely an important source of microtraumatisms and can be the cause of multiple
nail alterations: excessive pumicing or buffing can cause thinning of the nail plate and redness
of the nail bed; repeated traumatisms on the nail matrix area can cause striate leukonychia
(transverse white streaks) (Fig. 5) or Beau’s lines (superficial transverse grooves).
The destruction of the cuticle leads to chronic paronychia.
The caring of the distal nail groove can cause onycholysis with proximal irregular
indentation (Fig. 6), and caring of the periungual fold can cause small sores.
The damage to the cuticle, the onycholysis and the periungual sores favor bacterial and
mycotic infections. The risk of transmitting infections in nail salons should not be neglected. A
woman was awarded $3.1 million after contracting herpes, which spread to all 10 fingers.
Precise standards of disinfection should be observed (7).
Figure 5
Leuconychia striata caused
by overzealous manicure.
Figure 6
Onycholysis caused by excessive caring of the
distal nail groove.
748
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 766 ===
After contact with polish removers, the skin may have a white scaly appearance caused
by stratum corneum dehydration; repeated application leads to irritant dermatitis. A single
prolonged contact may even cause superficial blistering (9).
Cuticle removers should not be left too long in contact with the nail either, because they
can cause irritation and should not be used on people who are susceptible to paronychia (10).
In 1982, manufacturers reported receiving more complaints from cuticle removers than for nail
polish removers: 2.3 and 0.33 complaints per million units sold, respectively (2).
Side effects of moisturizing creams (i.e., allergic contact dermatitis) are similar to those
observed on other parts of the body.
Systemic Side Effects are Exceptional
Ingestion of nail polish remover may result in acetone intoxication, with central nervous
system/respiratory depression, hyperglycemia, and ketosis (11). Inhaling nail polish removers
containing toluene and aliphatic acetates (e.g., ethyl acetate) can cause central nervous system
depression and a tight smothering feeling in the chest. As a consequence, excessive sniffing of
polish removers could also produce toxic symptoms (9).
Classical nail polish removers should not be confused with artificial nail removers, which
are much more dangerous systemically (see artificial nails/systemic side effects). In addition,
nail polish removers are flammable and represent a fire hazard.
NAIL POLISH (SYNONYMS: NAIL VARNISH, NAIL ENAMEL, NAIL LACQUERS)
The concept of nail painting is not new. Numerous civilizations have used different products
to enhance the beauty of nails. Henna is one of the most common product; it was probably
already used in ancient Egypt and is still used today. Red balsam leaves mixed with alum were
used in China, on the eve of the Mongol invasion (1250–1276) (12).
However, present polishes are quite recent; they appeared in the early 1920s. Their
existence is linked to the discovery of nitrocellulose properties and to the progress made at that
time in the automobile paint industry. Nitrocellulose was created by reacting natural cellulose
fibers with concentrated nitric acid (HNO3). Originally, it was used in high explosives,
particularly during World War I. Later, another property of nitrocellulose was especially used:
boiled in water, it decomposes enough to become soluble in organic solvents. After
evaporation of the solvents, it produces a shiny and hard film. This quick-drying nitrocellulose
lacquer rapidly achieved a great success in the developing car industry. Without the impetus
provided by the automobile industry, it is doubtful that lacquer technology and the supply of
good lacquer-grade nitrocellulose would have developed and been available for the
manufacture of nail polishes (13).
For historic reasons, nail varnishes are also called “nail polishes,” “nail lacquers,” and
“nail enamels” (13).
The perfect nail polish has to be easy to apply, and it should dry quickly. In addition, it
should leave a shiny, smooth, even, hard, and flexible film that is able to last five days.
Moreover, this polish should be removed without leaving any trace and should not have any
side effects. Finally, it should be stable in the bottle and should offer a wide range of colors,
enabling one to get the expected aesthetic effect.
The manufacture of nail polish is complex and potentially dangerous. It is only done in a
few big factories. Nail varnishes are then contracted out by cosmetic companies, packaged, and
labeled (14).
Composition (15)
The main constituent of the film that remains on the nail after drying (evaporation) is
nitrocellulose. The film former has a lot of qualities. In particular, it is hard, tough, stable, and
waterproof, but it is neither sufficiently adherent nor glossy or flexible.
To improve adherence and gloss, film modifiers are added. The most common one is
Santolite1 or toluene sulfonamide/formaldehyde resin (TSFR). TSFR is best designed under its
INCI name: tosylamide/formaldehyde resin. It is the heart of the polish. As it is a potent
sensitizer and contains formaldehyde, it tends to be replaced by other film modifiers that are
said to be hypoallergenic: glycerophthalic polyester resin, 4-methylbenzene sulfonamide-epoxy
Nail Cosmetics
749

=== Page 767 ===
resin, phthalic polyester resin, polyester-saturated hydroxylated resin (16). However, in 1997, 42
nail polishes sold in Finland and belonging to 20 different brands were studied (17). They all
contained TSFR, a factor of contact dermatitis, with concentrations from 0.02% to 11% in the
bottle and from 0.1% to 25% in the dry polish.
With the nitrocellulose and the film modifier, the resulting film is hard, tough, adherent,
and glossy. Unfortunately, it is still not flexible enough and cracks.
Plasticizers are added to increase flexibility. These are molecules with a high boiling
point, which remain in the film after drying. They reportedly increase separation between the
cellulose links as well as increasing the rate of solvent evaporation. Dibutyl phthalate and
camphor enter this category. However, the former has been banned (65 Californian proposition
in the United States). Other examples are castor oil, glyceryl tribenzoate, acetyl tributyl citrate,
PPG-2 dibenzoate, glycerol, citrate esters, triacetin, and a polymer plasticizer called
“NEPLAST” (a polyether-urethane) (15). While the film modifiers counterbalance the negative
aspects of nitrocellulose, plasticizers modify the properties of the entire film. The glyceryl
tribenzoate would even replace the film modifier in some nail polishes (15).
In the nail polish bottle, there are not only nitrocellulose, thermoplastic resin, and
plasticizers but also solvents and thinners, pigments and dyes, thixotropic agents, as well as
other additives.
The most commonly used solvents are alkyl esters (ethyl, N-butyl acetate) and glycol
ethers (propylene glycol monomethyl ether). These molecules, which have different boiling
points and evaporation rates, allow the regulation of drying time. They also allow lower
viscosity, which improves brushability.
Thinners or diluents are not real nitrocellulose solvents but are miscible with them. This
allows reduction of the nail varnish price. Thinners also help regulate the evaporation rates
and stabilize viscosity. Indeed, a polish low in viscosity is easy to apply and leaves a
homogeneous film. If viscosity is too low, the coverage of the film will be insufficient. If
viscosity is too high, the film will be thick and streaky. Thinners essentially are aliphatic
alcohols such as ethanol, isopropanol and butanol and aromatic hydrocarbures such as
toluene. This latter, which is now considered to be cancerogenous and teratogenous, is no
longer used in new nail lacquer formulations (15).
Pigments and colorants also need to draw the attention. Some are soluble in nitrocellulose
and originate transparent polishes, very slightly colored. Most of them are not soluble and
originate the most-used polishes: the nail enamels (13).
Example:
l Mineral pigments: ferric ferrocyanide (Prussian blue), titanium dioxide (TiO2).
l Organic pigments: D&C red 6,7,34/FD&C yellow 5
Prussian blue is used in small amounts to enhance blues and alter other shades. TiO2
allows the attainment of pastel shades. D&C red 6 is a barium lake, D&C red 7 and 34 are
calcium lakes, and D&C yellow 5 a zirconium lake, a lake being formed by precipitating a
particular pigment with aluminum hydroxide to form a salt complex (15).
In pearlescent nail varnishes, there are guanine crystals, derived from scales of Atlantic
herring and other fish, bismuth oxychloride, or mica coated with TiO2.
The use of thermochrome pigments, of which the color changes according to the
temperature, and photochrome pigments, of which the shade varies according to the light,
offer new possibilities (18).
As a lot of pigments are insoluble, manufacturers had to cope with major problems of
precipitation until new thixotropic agents were discovered in the 1960s (13). Thixotropic agents
increase nail enamel viscosity at rest, thus preventing pigment precipitation. They, however,
become fluid as soon as a mechanical constraint is exerted, either by shaking the brush or the
bottle itself. This can be further improved by adding small metallic nickel (Ni) beads, often
covered with plastic, in the bottle; Ni, indeed, is a common source of allergic eczema in
women. Stearalkonium hectorite is the most frequently used suspending agent presenting
settling out the pigments.
Theoretical composition of a nail varnish with 15% nitrocellulose, 7% resin, and 7%
plasticizers is shown in Table 1.
750
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 768 ===
Base Coats, Top Coats, Hardeners, Hypoallergenic Varnishes
Nail varnishes represent an important market estimated at $430 million a year, in the United
States. (14). Besides classic nail polishes, base coats, top coats, hardeners, varnishes for brittle
nails, varnishes for ridged nails, and hypoallergenic nail polishes are also marketed. What are
they? All are nail varnishes with a slightly modified formulation.
The base coats contain more resin because they must increase the adherence of the varnish
to the nail (Table 1). They contain no colorant to act as a protective antistain barrier between
the nail plate and the shaded varnish (15).
On the contrary, the top coats contain more nitrocellulose and plasticizers because they
must be tough and flexible to improve nail varnish resistance (Table 1). Often, they also contain
special UV-absorbing materials, such as benzophenone 1 and 3, to help protect the underlying
colored coats. Base coats and top coats also contain different proportions of thinners and
solvents to ease application and to speed up drying.
Hardeners, varnishes for brittle nails, varnishes for ridged nails, etc. are in fashion. These are
generally base coats to which are added nylon fibers, acrylic resins, or formaldehyde.
In hardeners, formaldehyde is in its free state, which is not to be confused with
formaldehyde in the form of the TSFR in nail polishes (19). Formaldehyde is believed to
crosslink protein in the nail plate, which increases surface hardness but decreases flexibility.
In the long term, it may eventually be the cause of nail rigidity and cracks. Severe nail
damage such as painful hemorrhages, paronychia, and nail bed involvement with
subungual hyperkeratosis or onycholysis have been attributed to formaldehyde-based
hardeners (Fig. 7). Lips hemorrhages are also possible in nail biters (19,20). Moreover, the
presence of formaldehyde, which acts as an irritative agent, would favor TSFR sensitization
(21). The presence of formaldehyde is now limited to less than 5%, and a shield for the skin
should be used. Formaldehyde-containing hardeners are meant to be applied only to the
free edge of the nail (19). In fact formaldehyde should be avoided.
New hardeners containing mandelic acid or silicium are marketed. In contrast to most
a-hydroxyacid (AHA), acetyl mandelic acid in ISO propyl alcohol and butylenes glycol has
been shown to cause thickenings in keratins. Silicium is purported to penetrate into the nail
and to reinforce the disulfide linkage of the keratin. However, in both cases, biometric studies
in nails are not available.
Calcium, vitamins, sulfured amino acid, and collagen can be added to the treating nail
varnishes. These have probably no value. Two percent dimethyl urea is used in “Nail
Intensity” by creative nail design (22). Chitosan has shown an increase in the linear nail growth
in a double-blind study (23).
Table 1
Nail Polish: Typical Formula. Comparison with Base Coat and Top Coat
Ingredients (approximate
concentration in %)
Nail polish
Base coat
Top coat
Nitrocellulose
ca 15
TSFR
ca 7
Plasticizer
ca 7
Solvents–diluants
ca 70
Butyl acetate
1.5–52
Ethyl acetate
4–42
#
#
Isopropanol
2.7–7.7
Tolue`ne
20
Suspending agent
ca 1
Color pigments mixture
0.1
TSFR: toluene sulfonamide formaldehyde resin;
: lower concentration;
: higher concentration; #: different
concentrations
Source: From Refs. 3, 17.
g
Nail Cosmetics
751

=== Page 769 ===
Hypoallergenic nail polishes are polishes from which the most common substances
causing allergic contact dermatitis, specially TSFR, have been removed. For example, the
Pure Vernis1 contains neither TSFR, nor phthalate or nickel balls. The resin is a polyester
glycerophthalic resin. The plastifier is tributyl citrate acetyl. Nevertheless, these polishes do
not guarantee the absence of reactions. Allergies to constituents of hypoallergenic varnishes
have been described: polyester resin (24), epoxy resin (25), methyl acrylate (23), as well as
rare cases of nitrocellulose allergy itself (26).
Recent Developments in Nail Polishes (14)
There is an increasing interest for quick-drying and long-lasting nail polishes, but these
qualities are almost mutually exclusive. Nail polishes can be either quick drying or long
lasting, not both. Quick-drying nail polishes contain low quantities of film former and are thus
brittle.
Fragrances can now be added in nail polishes as well as metal or plastic glitters to give
special effects.
Nail varnishes that are removed by peeling off also exist.
Water-based nail polishes have appeared. They are popular in Japan and with teenagers.
As they contain water, they are prone to microbial contamination, and they have to be
preserved, for example, with quaternium 15. Until now, water-based nail polishes are very
brittle and crack but, according to Schoon (15), they probably constitute the future of nail
polishes because a wider variety of additives could be added to them, which may eventually
lead to truly preventing or help in treating common nail pathologies.
Use
After the manicure, the nail is degreased, dried, and covered with one layer of base coat, two
layers of the colored nail enamel, and one layer of top coat (Fig. 8). The layers have to be thin
and as uniform as possible. To do this, the quality of the nail polish and of the brush are both
very important.
The varnish laying can be completed by spraying on or applying with a brush a film-
drying accelerant that will protect the varnish while it is drying. (Silicone oil blends and
silicone/water oil in water emulsions) (7).
The wearing of varnish is recommended for five of seven days.
Figure 7
Subungual hemorrhage caused by a formalde-
hyde-based hardener.
752
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 770 ===
Nail Polish Advantages
They are numerous. Firstly, nail polishes have an aesthetic advantage: they offer more
refinement and elegance and allow for a wide range of personal preferences.
Secondly, the nail varnish plays a protective role: it forms a film on the nail surface,
which is both tough and flexible, increasing the resistance of the nail to microtraumatisms. It
also maintains a more constant degree of nail hydration.
In pathology, nail lacquers allow chromonychia and onycholysis to be hidden.
Unfortunately, they can also hide a subungual melanoma and therefore delay its diagnosis
(27).
Unwanted Effects of Nail Polishes (3,7,8)
They do exist but are relatively rare: in 1982, manufacturers reported receiving 0.28 complaints
per million units distributed (2).
The nail polishes can cause an orange staining of the nail plate, prominent at the distal part.
It is more frequently observed with the deeper shades of red and brown enamels and can be
prevented by the former application of a base coat. But it has become rare, since soluble
pigments are mainly used.
Nail lacquers can cause keratin granulation (Fig. 9), presenting as superficial friability.
This happens when individuals apply fresh coats of enamels on top of old ones, for several
weeks. Therefore, it is advisable to wear a varnish five in seven days only.
Figure 9
Keratin granulations Source:
Courtesy of B. Richert, Belgium.
Figure 8
Varnish laying.
Nail Cosmetics
753

=== Page 771 ===
Nail varnishes can also cause allergic contact dermatitis, more rarely, contact urticaria.
Eczema breaks out especially on the eyelids, on the lower half of the face, on the sides of
the neck (Fig. 10), and on the upper chest. In addition to distant (ectopic) contact dermatitis,
allergic airborne contact dermatitis should be suspected when lesions on the face, neck, and
ears are symmetrical. However, periungual dermatitis (28) is rare, but exists (29). The allergic
contact dermatitis due to nail varnishes can have severe sociomedical consequences such as
sick leave and hospitalization. Their diagnosis is easily missed (28).
The true incidence of reactions is not high: cosmetics cause 5.4% of contact dermatitis
cases (30,31). Of the cosmetic reactions, nail products ranked fourth in the North American
Contact Dermatitis Group study, producing 8% of the reactions (30). They ranked second,
producing 13.4% of the reactions in a European study conducted by de Groot (31), in Holland.
In a review of published cases, from 1925 to 1993, the most frequent allergen was by far TSFR,
which was responsible for more than 347 cases (32). The guanine and the phthalates were
respectively responsible for only four and three cases.
Among the most frequent allergens in cosmetics, TSFR comes in second place, after
Kathon CG or paraphenylenediamine, in the studies of de Groot (31) and of Tosti (29) and in
sixth place in the study of Adams and Maibach (30).
One case of both big toenail onycholysis, due to contact sensitivity to benzalkonium in a
nail lacquer, has been reported (33).
Nail Polishes and Hospital
Nail polish should be removed routinely before anesthesia. Indeed, nail polishes, specially
blue and green ones, significantly interfere with the measurement of oxygen saturation by
pulse oximetry (34).
In health care workers, nail polish is allowed as long as it is worn on short nails and is
fresh, not chipped (7). At equal length, the germ contamination rate does not seem higher for
fresh painted nails than for natural ones.
THE ARTIFICIAL NAILS
Bringing very long nails into fashion may have originated from China (35). In the popular
imagery, Chinese mandarins are often represented with very long nails. See, for example, the
Chinese mandarin of Herge´ in Tintin and The Blue Lotus (36).
The first artificial nails appeared in the United States, around 1935. Since then, thanks to
their improving quality, they have become more and more popular. Annual business in nail
salons in the United States is estimated at $6.3 billion. (14). Artificial nails were almost
Figure 10
Eczema on the sides of the
neck due to nail varnish allergy.
754
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 772 ===
exclusively applied by professionally trained manicurists in nail salons. However, professional
nail applications are expensive, and artificial nail kits designed for home use are now available
over the counter (37).
Composition and Techniques
To make things easier, two different kinds of artificial nails can be considered: the artificial
sculptured nails and the artificial preformed nails.
Sculptured Nail Technique
In the sculptured nail technique, artificial nail is made of an acrylic resin obtained by blending a
methyl, ethyl, or isobutyl methacrylate monomer, which comes in a liquid form, and a
polymethyl or ethyl methacrylate polymer, which is a powder. The methyl methacrylate
monomer, banned in certain American states because of its side effects, may still be used,
especially in discount price salons. Indeed, this monomer, which smells terrible, is cheap and
allows to work quickly (14).
The monomer also contains a stabilizer such as hydroquinone and N,N-dimethyl-p-
toluidine as an accelerator. The polymer also contains benzoylperoxide as a polymerization
initiator.
Typical formula (3):
l Liquid: Acryl-type monomer (ca 99%). Example: methylmethacrylate monomer
Stabilizer (ca 1%). Example: hydroquinone
l Powder: Acryl-type polymer (ca 97%). Example: polymethylmethacrylate
Polymerization initiator (ca 3%). Example: benzoylperoxide
Other components such as plasticizers, solvents, accelerators, and pigments may be
included (38).
The nail plate surface is pumiced. After disinfection, a metallized paperboard template is
placed to frame the new nail, and a primer is painted on the nail (Fig. 11). The latter is a highly
acidic solution, most commonly methacrylic acid with a pH as low as 2. It acts as a double-
sided sticky tape.
Next, several layers of the acrylic paste that has just been blended are applied. For bigger
refinement, a white paste is first applied on the template and shaped (Fig. 12); then a pinker
one is applied on the natural nail and the template, and again shaped (Fig. 13).
After hardening at room temperature, which occurs rapidly, the template is removed and
the nail is pumiced (Fig. 14), filed (Fig. 15), and buffed, producing a long, smooth, and
attractive nail.
Figure 11
A metallized paperboard
template is placed. Then a primer is
painted on the nail.
Nail Cosmetics
755

=== Page 773 ===
Figure 13
A pinker paste is applied on
the natural nail and the template.
Figure 14
The sculptured nail is
pumiced.
Figure 12
A white paste is first applied
on the template.
756
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 774 ===
This sculptured nail technique is rather difficult to perform. Its apprenticeship is long
and requires good skills from the nail sculptor. However, this technique can be used on
seriously damaged nail surface. Clients need maintenance filing.
Sculptured nails can be dissolved in acetone.
Artificial Preformed Nails
The second technique uses preformed plastic tips, which are packaged in several shapes and
sizes, adapted to the different fingernails (Fig. 16).
The nail plate surface is buffed. After disinfection, the preformed plastic tip is simply
fixed with cyanoacrylate glue, on the distal half of the nail (Fig. 17).
Typical formula of cyanoacrylate glue (38):
l Ethyl cyanoacrylate
90.6%
l Polymethyl methacrylate
9%
l Hydroquinone
0.4%
l Stabilizer (organic sulfonic acid) Trace
l Plasticizers and thickenings agents may be added.
Figure 15
The sculptured nail is filed.
Note the small sore in the proximal nail
fold (arrow). The latter appeared while
pumicing with the electric device shown.
Figure 16
Preformed plastic tips.
Nail Cosmetics
757

=== Page 775 ===
Then, the artificial nail, which is too long, is cut with a special “guillotine clipper”
(Fig. 18). It is also filed and buffed to give it the desired shape and length.
At this stage, the nail surface is not smooth; it presents a bump between the proximal
natural nail and the proximal border of distal artificial nail (Fig. 19). An acrylic gel is therefore
painted on the nail like a nail polish (Fig. 20). It will harden, in other words polymerize, after
UV exposure.
This technique is much easier to learn than the sculptured nail technique. It does not
require any special skills, but there is a normal nail to be present for attachment. If not, the
plastic nail will never be sufficiently glued. They should not remain for more than one or two
days in time.
Light-Cured Gels
Gels are a premixed variant of sculptured nails. They are made of a mixture of acrylic
monomers and polymers directly provided by the manufacturer.
They are more and more popular because they are odorless, give a more natural aspect to
the nails, and do not require irritant (meth)acrylic acid as a primer.
Figure 17
Preformed plastic tips
glued on the distal part of the nail.
Figure 18
The artificial nail is cut with
a special “guillotine clipper.”
758
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 776 ===
New gel formulations are regularly marketed, but there are two main types of gels:
1.
Acrylic light-cured gels in which the polymerization or hardening is obtained by
exposure to light (most often to UV). These gels may contain (meth)acrylated
urethanes, triethyleneglycol dimethacrylate, methacrylated epoxy resin or hydrox-
yfunctional methacrylates (39), and a photoinitiator. The bonding is similar to
“restorative dental bonding” commonly used by many dentists worldwide (40).
It should be pointed out that acetone will have no effect on UV-gels in contrast
to artificial sculptured nail. If a patient becomes allergic, the artificial nails must be
grinded off with heavy abrasive (20).
2.
Cyanoacrylate gels in which the polymerization is obtained by spraying or brushing an
activator. For example: ethyl-cyanoacrylate gel; activator, N,N di-methyl paratoluidine.
There are gels with different consistencies, designed for different uses, the consistency
being determined by the resin to monomer ratio. There are also colored gels.
According to their composition, the gels can be used for different purposes (20):
l For the sculptured nail technique. However, gels do not allow production of as long
and resistant nails than the classical liquid-powder technique.
Figure 19
Bump (arrow) between the
proximal natural nail and the distal
artificial nail.
Figure 20
An acrylic gel is painted on
the nail.
Nail Cosmetics
759

=== Page 777 ===
l Over plastic tips as we have just seen.
l To protect a natural or polished nail. This procedure is known as “nail capping.”
l Capping with fabric (silk, linen, and fiberglass) adds strength and is known as “nail
wrapping.”
l Sprinkle resins based on cyanoacrylate resins, moisture cure, and trace quinone-type
polymerization are present. Amine-based spray or brush-on polymerization activator
may be used.
Advantages of Artificial Nails
Artificial nails are much more resistant than natural ones; nail polishes easily remain on them
for three weeks.
They allow refinement and fantasy, which are much superior to those obtained with nail
enamels. They can be decorated with jewels. Genuine work of art can be realized with special
airbrushes (nail art) (37) (Fig. 21).
Artificial nails are mainly used for brittle or broken nails and for onychophagia.
However, artificial nails should not be recommended in onychophagia associated with small
wounds. Indeed, periungual sores that are so frequent in nail biters could favor acrylic
sensitisation.
In pathology, they allow to hide more serious dystrophies than the nail polishes, such as
posttraumatic permanent nail dystrophy (Figs. 22 and 23) or racket nails. After big toenail
shedding in a tennis player or a skier, an artificial nail can prevent the hypertrophy of the
periungual soft tissues, allowing a painless nail regrowth.
Artificial nails should not be recommended in case of nail psoriasis or lichen planus
because they can worsen the condition by Koebner phenomenon (20).
Unwanted Effects of Artificial Nails (5,37)
Artificial nails are expensive and time consuming. It takes about one hour to put a set of 10
artificial nails in place, and moreover, they must be taken care of every two to three weeks. As
the natural nail continues to grow, the proximal part of the artificial nail must be refilled. The
adhesion between the natural and the artificial nail must also be checked; it must remain
watertight.
Side effects of artificial nails can be classified in two main groups:
l Nonallergic reactions because of technical errors, bad care, or wearing of too long
nails, which are most frequent
l Allergic or toxic reactions
Figure 21
Air brushes made “nail art.”
760
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 778 ===
NONALLERGIC REACTIONS
Technical errors or bad care cause brittleness of the natural nail by excessive filing or pumicing
and inadequate use of the primer. After two or four months of wear, it is not unusual for a
sculptured nail to damage the underlying natural nail. If it becomes yellow or crumbly, this
means that the product was applied and maintained incorrectly. Instead of wearing prosthetic
nails for no more than three consecutive months, with reapplication after one-month interval,
it should be more appropriate to find a better-qualified nail technician. The problem may well
not be the acrylic nail materials but rather the thinning of the nail because of over-filing with
heavy abrasives. Small periungual sores (Figs. 15 and 24) are frequently observed. They could
favor acrylic sensitization.
The penetration of water between the natural and the artificial nail is a frequent
complication in artificial nails, which shows up as superficial nail plate discoloration (Fig. 25).
Individuals in frequent contact with water, such as nurses, bartenders, and so on, have
difficulty keeping on acrylic nails. This side effect is well known by nail technicians who
remove the artificial nail, buff the nail surface to make the discoloration disappear, and
sculpture a new, tightly adherent, artificial nail.
The wearing of too long nails favors onycholysis as well as nail fracture. It impairs finger
and hand performance (41).
Figure 23
Posttraumatic permanent
nail dystrophy as seen in Fig. 22, after
application of an artificial nail. Note the
small sore in the lateral nail groove
(arrow).
Figure 22
Posttraumatic permanent
nail dystrophy.
Nail Cosmetics
761

=== Page 779 ===
The wearing of too long nails, the onycholysis, the periungual sores, the penetration of
water favor mycotic and microbial infections. These can be severe, especially in diabetics and
immunocompromised people (42). Three cases of Pseudomonas corneal ulcers after artificial
fingernail injuries have been described (43). There is a recent concern for microbial
contamination of artificial nails in health care workers (see below).
Inappropriate Use
A case of “pseudo-onycho-palatitis” has recently been described. A mother had offered her
right index finger in place of a pacifier to her baby. The mother’s artificial nail became
detached and was stuck on the palate. Several hours later, correct diagnosis was made when
the infant was brought to hospital (44).
ALLERGIC OR TOXIC REACTIONS
Contact dermatitis to artificial nails can affect the client, less frequently the manicurist (40,45).
Here, unlike nail-lacquer dermatitis, paronychia accompanied by onycholysis or subungual
dermatitis are more likely to be present. Eyelid dermatitis is frequently associated. Women are
usually not aware that artificial nails are a possible cause of allergy (46,47), and diagnosis is
often delayed. When the use of artificial nail is discontinued, it is worth noting that it takes
several months for the nails to return to normal.
Figure 25
Superficial nail plate dis-
coloration due to bad adherence
between the normal and the artificial
nail.
Figure 24
Severe alteration of the
nail plates with distal onycholysis due
to artificial nail allergy.
762
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 780 ===
Sculptured Nails
The most frequent allergen is the (meth)acrylate monomer, whereas the polymer is considered
to be a weak sensitizer. Sensitization seems to be primarily caused by the monomer, which
remains unpolymerized, in the final sculptured nail and in the filing dust, produced when the
sculptured nail is trimmed (40). This is specially observed with self-curing resins, but even in
photobonded acrylic nails monomer persists. The nail technicians should apply thin successive
gel layers and expose each layer to UV, which is rarely done.
Allergic contact-type reactions were first described with methyl methacrylate monomer, but
other monomers (e.g., ethyl and butyl methacrylates) can induce sensitisation, and cross-reactions
also occur (39,48). They may be even stronger sensitizers than methyl methacrylate (49).
The allergic reaction usually starts two to four months, and even as long as
16 months, after the first application (37). The first symptom is an itch in the nail bed,
followed by painful paronychia, which can be associated with paresthesia. Nail bed
hyperkeratosis or onycholysis is frequently observed. Distant allergic contact dermatitis may
affect the eyelids and the face, but more widespread lesions are also possible (50). Six cases of
occupational asthma due to ethyl methacrylate have been reported in cosmetologists working
with artificial nails (37).
Exceptional cases of severe paresthesia evolving for several years were described. These
were accompanied by Raynaud’s-like syndrome and permanent nail loss (48). They could
result from a direct, toxic effect on the wounded Ranvier’s cutaneous nerves in nail biters for
instance. Patch tests may remain negative (51).
Prolonged paresthesia of the fingertips were also observed with photobonded acrylic-
sculptured nails (39), and two natural nails had to be surgically removed because of resistant
superinfections (40).
In contrast to the manufacturers’ declarations, many “hypoallergenic” products continue
to include acrylate functional monomers and therefore cause allergic sensitization (40).
Cyanoacrylate Nail Preparations
Initially, it was believed that the cyanoacrylates were not sensitizers. We now know that such
cyanoacrylates can produce allergic reactions (39). Cyanoacrylates do not usually crossreact
with the (meth)acrylate monomers used in nail preparations (38,45,48), although in a study
performed by Koppula (52) ethyl a-cyanoacrylate did crossreact with several acrylates.
The cyanoacrylate glue, either used for nail wraps composed of silk, linen, fiberglass, or
with plastic tips that should never cover more than distal half the nail, can be responsible for
an eczema of the fingertips, with nail involvement [onycholysis, subungual hyperkeratosis
(46), rough, split, deformed (53), or discolored (39) nail plates] (Figs. 25 and 26). An eyelid
dermatitis as well as a nummular eczema can be present, particularly over the dorsal hand
(54). More widespread eruption were also described (46); one case mimicked a small plaque
parapsoriasis eruption (55).
Figure 26
Same patient as seen in
Figure 25: positive patch tests with
ethyl-cyanoacrylate glue and one of
the patient’s own product.
Nail Cosmetics
763

=== Page 781 ===
Persistence of the dermatitis until the nails grow out is frequently observed and is
probably caused by retained adhesive. A positive patch test to nail clippings was indeed
obtained in one patient, some two months after stopping the use of cyanoacrylate (46).
Patch testing is very easy, using a few drops of the cyanoacrylate adhesive, placed on the
gauze portion of an adhesive plaster and allowed to dry before application (46).
Paresthesia has not yet been reported from cyanoacrylate glue.
Methacrylic Acid–Containing Primers
Nail-care products are a common cause of accidental poisoning in children. Such products
accounted for 198,084 exposures (16% of exposures to cosmetics and personal-care household
products) reported to the American Association of Poison Control Centers, in 1997 (56). Most
nail product exposures involved either polish or nail polish removers, both of which are
generally of low-order toxicity. However, products used in the application and removal of
artificial nails are potentially hazardous and their packaging and labeling information are
inadequate.
Methacrylic acid–containing primers are particularly involved: more than 759 exposures
to methacrylic acid–containing artificial nail preparations were gathered by the American
Association of Poison Control Centers. Seventy-five percent involved preschoolers younger
than six years and almost 10% resulted in either moderate or severe injuries. Dermal burns
were mainly reported, but burns of the airway and gastrointestinal tract with residual
esophageal dysfunction were also described (57). Out of the 759 exposures, 84.9% had occurred
at home, expressing the recent trend toward domestic use of artificial nail products, previously
restricted to professional cosmeticians in nail salons. This home use has been done without a
concomitant review of packaging safety. It is now recommended that the primers should be
dispensed in child-safety containers (56).
Systemic Side Effects
Acetonitrile-containing artificial nail glue removers were removed from the market, after causing
several childhood cyanide-poisoning deaths (58).
Six cases of profound methemoglobinemia were reported in children aged 13 to
27 months (59). They appeared following ingestion of small quantities of artificial nail removers
containing nitroethane. The authors concluded that these products should be packaged in child-
safety containers and properly labeled. Their availability for home use should be questioned.
N,N-dimethyl-p-toluidine can also cause methemoglobinemia when ingested (60,61).
ARTIFICIAL NAILS AND HOSPITAL
Unpolished acrylic nails do not affect pulse oximetry measurements of oxygen saturation.
Theoretically, patients may not need to remove them before surgery (62); however, thick
ornately painted gel false nails, which may be difficult to remove, present a real challenge to
pulse oximetry (37).
There is a Real Concern for Microbial Contamination of Artificial Nails (35)
In health care workers with artificial nails, it has been shown that there is not only an increased
amount of carriage of pathogen such as gram-negative bacteria (63–64) but also Staphylococcus
aureus and yeasts, and this is observed both before and after washing the nails (65). In one
study, Serratia, Acinetobacter, and Pseudomonas were cultured only from the fingertips of nurses
wearing artificial nails (64). In a recent epidemiologic and molecular investigation of endemic
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in a neonatal intensive care unit, it was shown that the use
of artificial nails or nail wraps was a risk factor for colonization of the health care worker’s
hands (66).
Two nosocomial infectious outbreaks have been described where nurses wearing
artificial nails could have played an important role in the transmission of potentially lethal
infections. The first report dealt with Serratia marcescens infections in a cardiovascular surgery
unit (67). The other report dealt with P. aeruginosa infection in a neonatal intensive care unit
(68).
764
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 782 ===
It should be added that individuals with artificial nails tend to wear their nails longer
(65); they are more careful about their nails when washing their hands, and sanitary conditions
for application of artificial nails, whether at the nail salon or at home, are paramount in
preventing nail infections (68).
In the United States, the association of operating room nurses has guidelines concerning
the nails. It is recommended that the nails should be kept short and clean. Nail polish can be
used only fresh (but not chipped) and artificial nails should not be worn.
These guidelines should probably be extended to all health care workers, especially
when they are dealing with immunocompromised patients. In addition, the 3-mm rule for end-
of-fingernail length should be emphasized (69).
NAIL PROSTHESIS
For permanent nail degloving, following accidental or surgical origin and in congenital nail or
missing digit, thimble-shaped digital fixation, for example, brings aesthetic and functional
comfort to the patient (70).
REFERENCES
1. Reeder G. United for eternity. KMT 1993; 4:22–31.
2. Engasser PG, Matsunaga J. Nails cosmetics. In: Scher RK, Daniel CR, eds. Nails: Therapy, Diagnosis,
Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company, 1990:215–223.
3. de Groot AC, Weyland JW, Nater JP. Nail cosmetics. In: Unwanted Effects of Cosmetics and Drugs
Used in Dermatology. 3rd ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1994:524–529.
4. Wallis MS, Bowen WR, Guin JD. Pathogenesis of onychoschizia (lamellar dystrophy). J Am Acad
Dermatol 1991; 24:44–48.
5. Baran R. Nail cosmetics: allergies and irritations. Am J Clin Dermatol 2002; 3:547.
6. Finlay AY, Frost Ph, Keith AD, et al. Effects of phospholipids and water on brittleness of nails. In:
Frost Ph, Horwitz SN, eds. Principles of Cosmetics for the Dermatologist. St. Louis: The CV Mosby
Company, 1982:175–180.
7. Baran R, Schoon D. Cosmetology for normal nails. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Cosmetic
Dermatology. 2nd ed. London: Martin Dunitz, 1998:219–231.
8. Rosenzweig R, Scher RK. Nail cosmetics: adverse reactions. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1993; 4:71–77.
9. Kechijian P. Nail polish removers: are they harmful? Semin Dermatol 1991; 10:26–28.
10. Rietschel RL, Fowler JF. Allergy to preservatives and vehicles in cosmetics and toiletries. In: Rietschel
RL, Fowler JF, eds. Fishers’ Contact Dermatitis. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2001:211–278.
11. Gamis AS, Wasserman GS. Acute acetone intoxication in a pediatric patient. Pediatr Emerg Care 1988;
4:24–26.
12. Gernet J. La vie quotidienne en Chine a` la veille de l’invasion mongole 1250-1276. Hachette 1959:
137–138.
13. Wimmer EP, Schlossman ML. The history of nail polish. Cosmet Toilet 1992; 107:115–120.
14. Engasser PG. What’s the latest in nail cosmetics. Lecture at the Nail Symposium, 58th Annual Meeting
of the American Academy of Dermatology; 2000; San Francisco, CA.
15. Schoon D. Nail varnish formulation. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Cosmetic
Dermatology. 3rd ed. London: Martin Dunitz, 2005:313–318.
16. Giorgini S, Brusi C, Francalanci S, et al. Prevention of allergic contact dermatitis from nail varnishes
and hardeners. Contact Dermatitis 1994; 31:325–326.
17. Sainio EL, Engstro¨m K, Henriks-Eckerman ML, et al. Allergenic ingredients in nail polishes. Contact
Dermatitis 1997; 37:155–162.
18. Abimelec Ph. Cosme´tologie ungue´ale. In: Encycl Med Chir. Cosme´tologie et Dermatologie Esthe´tique.
Paris: Elsevier, 2000:50-180-A-10.
19. Norton LA. Common and uncommon reactions to formaldehyde-containing nail hardeners. Semin
Dermatol 1991; 10:29–33.
20. Baran R, Schoon D. Cosmetics for abnormal and pathological nails. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, eds.
Textbook of Cosmetic Dermatology. 3rd ed. London: Martin Dunitz, 2005:201–312.
21. de Wit FS, de Groot AC, Weyland JW, et al. An outbreak of contact dermatitis from
toluenesulfonamide-formaldehyde resin in a nail hardener. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 18:280–283.
22. Baran R, Schoon D. Nail fragility syndrome and its fragility. J Cosmet Dermatol 2004; 3:131–137.
Nail Cosmetics
765

=== Page 783 ===
23. Baran R, Sparavigna H, Mailland F, et al. Hydroxypropyl chitosan accelerates nail growth both in
healthing fingernails and in mycotic toenails. Poster (abstr 904).
24. Shaw S. A case of contact dermatitis from “hypoallergenic” nail varnish. Contact Dermatitis 1989;
20:385.
25. Kanerva L, Lauerma A, Jolanki R, et al. Methyl acrylate: a new sensitizer in nail lacquer. Contact
Dermatitis 1995; 33:203–204.
26. Castelain M, Veyrat S, Laine G, et al. Contact dermatitis from nitrocellulose in a nail varnish. Contact
Dermatitis 1997; 36:266–267.
27. Goldman BD, Rich Ph. Subungual melanoma obscured by nail polish. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001;
44:875.
28. Lide´n C, Berg M, Fa¨rm G, et al. Nail varnish allergy with far-reaching consequences. Br J Dermatol
1993; 128:57–62.
29. Tosti A, Guerra L, Vincenzi C, et al. Contact sensitization caused by toluene sulfonamide-
formaldehyde resin in women who use nail cosmetics. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1993; 4:150–153.
30. Adams RM, Maibach HI. A five-year study of cosmetic reactions. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 6:
1062–1069.
31. de Groot AC, Bruynzeel DP, Bos JD, et al. The allergens in cosmetics. Arch Dermatol 1988; 124:
1525–1529.
32. Hausen BM, Milbrodt M, Koenig WA. The allergens of nail polish: allergenic constituents of common
nail polish and toluenesulfonamide-formaldehyde resin (TS-F-R). Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33:157–
164.
33. Guin JD, Wilson P. Onycholysis from nail lacquer: a complication of nail enhancement?Am J Contact
Dermatitis 1999; 10:34–36.
34. Cote´ CJ, Goldstein EA, Fuchsman WH, et al. The effect of nail polish on pulse oximetry. Anesth Analg
1988; 67:683–686.
35. Mahdihassan S. The manicuring system of keeping long nails originating from China. Am J Chin Med
1990; 18:197–199.
36. Herge´. The Adventures of Tintin: The Blue Lotus. Little, Brown and Company, 1984.
37. Baran R. Nail beauty: an attractive enhancement or a potential hazard? J Cosmet Dermatol 2002; 1:24–29.
38. Kanerva L, Lauerma A, Estlander T, et al. Occupational allergic contact dermatitis caused by
photobonded sculptured nails and a review of (meth)acrylates in nail cosmetics. Am J Contact
Dermatitis 1996; 7:109–115.
39. Hemmer W, Focke M, Wantke F, et al. Allergic contact dermatitis to artificial fingernails prepared
from UV light-cured acrylates. J Am Acad Dermatol 1996; 35:377–380.
40. Fisher AA, Baran R. Adverse reactions to acrylate sculptured nails with particular reference to
prolonged paresthesia. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1991; 2:38–42.
41. Jansen CW, Patterson R, Viegas SF. Effects of fingernail length on finger and hand performance.
J Hand Ther 2000; 13:211–217.
42. Roberge RJ, Weinstein D, Thimons MM. Perionychial infections associated with sculptured nails. Am
J Emerg Med 1999; 17:581–582.
43. Parker AV, Cohen EJ, Arentsen JJ. Pseudomonas corneal ulcers after artificial fingernail injuries. Am J
Ophtalmol 1989; 107:548–549.
44. Vogeley E. Danger of artificial nails. Pediatrics 1999; 104:132.
45. Kanerva L, Estlander T. Allergic onycholysis and paronychia caused by cyanoacrylate nail glue, but
not by photobonded methacrylate nails. Eur J Dermatol 1999; 9:223–225.
46. Guin JD, Baas K, Nelson-Adesokan P. Contact sensitization to cyanoacrylate adhesive as a cause of
severe onychodystrophy. Int J Dermatol 1998; 37:31–36.
47. Erdmann SM, Sachs B, Merk HF. Adverse reactions to sculptured nails. Allergy 2001; 56:581–582.
48. Fisher AA. Permanent loss of fingernails due to allergic reaction to an acrylic nail preparation: a
sixteen-year follow-up study. Cutis 1989; 43:404–406.
49. Kanerva L, Estlander T, Jolanki R, et al. Statistics on allergic patch test reactions caused by acrylate
compounds, including data on ethyl methacrylate. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1995; 6:75–77.
50. Fitzgerald DA, English JSC. Widespread contact dermatitis from sculptured nails. Contact Dermatitis
1994; 30:118.
51. Baran R, Schibli H. Permanent paresthesia to sculptured nails: a distressing problem. Contact
Dermatitis 1990; 8:139–141.
52. Koppula SV, Fellman JH, Storrs FJ. Screening allergens for acrylate dermatitis associated with
artificial nails. Am J Contact Dermatitis 1995; 6:78–85.
53. Shelley ED, Shelley WB. Nail dystrophy and periungual dermatitis due to cyanoacrylate glue
sensitivity. J Am Acad Dermatol 1988; 19:574–575.
54. Belsito DV. Contact dermatitis to ethyl-cyanoacrylate-containing glue. Contact Dermatitis 1987;
17:234–236.
766
Andre´ and Baran

=== Page 784 ===
55. Shelley ED, Shelley WB. Chronic dermatitis simulating small-plaque parapsoriasis due to
cyanoacrylate adhesive used on fingernails. JAMA 1984; 252:2455–2456.
56. Woolf A, Shaw J. Childhood injuries from artificial nail primer cosmetic products. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med 1998; 152:41–46.
57. Linden CH, Dowsett RP, Liebelt EL, et al. Corrosive injury from methacrylic acid in artificial nail
primers: another hazard of fingernail products. Pediatrics 1998; 102:979–983.
58. Woolf AD, Shaw JS. Nail primer cosmetics: correlations between product pH and adequacy of
labeling. Clin Toxicol 1999; 37:827–883.
59. Shepherd G, Grover J, Klein-Schwarts W. Prolonged formation of methemoglobin following
nitroethane ingestion. Clin Toxicol 1998; 36:613–616.
60. Potter JL, Krill CE, Neal D, et al. Methemoglobinemia due to ingestion of N,N-dimethyl-p-toluidine, a
component used in the fabrication of artificial nails. Ann Emerg Med 1988; 17:1098–1100.
61. Kao L, Leikin JB, Crockett M, et al. Methemoglobinemia from artificial fingernail solution. JAMA
1997; 278:549–550.
62. Peters SM. The effect of acrylic nails on the measurement of oxygen saturation as determined by pulse
oximetry. AANA J 1997; 65:361–363.
63. Edel E, Houston S, Kennedy V, et al. Impact of a five-minute scrub on the microbial flora found on
artificial, polished, or natural fingernails of operating room personnel. Nurs Res 1998; 47:54–59.
64. Pottinger J, Burns S, Manske C. Bacterial carriage by artificial versus natural nails. Am J Infect Control
1989; 17:340–344.
65. McNeil SA, Foster CL, Hedderwick SA, et al. Effect of hand cleansing with antimicrobial soap or
alcohol-based gel on microbial colonization of artificial fingernails worn by health care workers. Clin
Infect Dis 2001; 32:367–372.
66. Foca M, Jakob K, Whittier S, et al. Endemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in a neonatal intensive
care unit. N Engl J Med 2000; 343:695–700.
67. Passaro DJ, Waring L, Armstrong R, et al. Postoperative Serratia marcescens wound infections traced to
an out-of-hospital source. J Infect Dis 1997; 175:992–995.
68. Moolenaar RL, Crutcher JM, San Joaquin VH, et al. A prolonged outbreak of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in
a neonatal intensive care unit: did staff fingernails play a role in disease transmission? Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2000; 21:80–85.
69. Jackson EM. Some hospitals ban artificial nails. Cosmet Dermatol 2001; 14:52–55.
70. Pillet J, Didierjean Pillet A. Ungual prostheses. J Dermatol Treat 2001; 12:41–46.
Nail Cosmetics
767

=== Page 786 ===
71
Surfactants: Classification
Louis Oldenhove de Guertechin
Lie`ge, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
Surfactants are chemical materials used by humans for centuries; a very remote use is reported
as a kind of soap already prepared with ash and vegetal oils by Sumerian people (ca. 10,000 BC).
Surfactants are used today in many practical applications in industry, home, and institutions.
Cosmetics is an important application area among others (detergents, foods, fabric softeners,
biocides, textiles industries, paints, inks, adhesives, dyes, herbicides, insecticides, fire
extinguishers, etc.).
The term “surfactant” applies to a group of molecules having both a hydrophilic part and
a hydrophobic (or lipophilic) part. Surfactants modify the interfacial properties of the liquids
in which they are incorporated; this property stems from their tendency to concentrate at the
interfaces separating immiscible phases.
This peculiar property favors the formation of micelles and structured liquid phases,
which are involved in numerous facets of the cosmetic world: cleansing action, direct and
inverse emulsions, gels, foam production, etc.
Depending on the nature of the hydrophilic moiety ensuring water affinity of the
molecule, surfactants are distributed in anionic, cationic, amphoteric, and nonionic classes.
Regarding the hydrophobic moiety of the molecule, it is a hydrocarbon chain in most
common surfactants; however, in some more specialized surfactants, this hydrophobic part
can be a non-hydrocarbon chain such as a polydimethylsiloxane or a perfluorocarbon.
The selection of surfactants in the frame of cosmetic products development is a delicate
task in which numerous factors have to be taken into account. Among others, one should
consider those directly related to functions to be fulfilled (detergency, emulsification, foam
quality, rinsability, mildness for skin, skin feel, etc.), and also those related to cost, toxicity, and
biodegradability.
Although few surfactants are naturally produced such as saponins or lecithins, there is a
trend to produce more and more surfactants issued from natural materials.
The aim of this chapter is to provide a classification of various commercially available
surfactants.
IONIC SURFACTANTS
Anionic Surfactants
In aqueous solution, anionic surfactant molecules carry negative charges if the composition pH is
not too low (slightly acidic, neutral, or alkaline). The ionized moiety can be a carboxylate, sulfate,
sulfonate, or phosphate. Among the most frequently used surfactants in skin care products, the
alkyl sulfates and alkyl ethoxylated sulfates can be mentioned for their high-foaming capacity.
Anionics are generally used in association with other surfactants (nonionics or amphoterics),
which bring improvements in the skin tolerance, foam quality, or product viscosity.
Other anionics are also used in personal products, however, as secondary surfactants,
often for their milder profile and their low-foaming properties (isethionates, sulfosuccinates,
taurates, sarcosinates, phosphoric acid esters, acylglutamates, etc.).
Carboxylates
Carboxylates salts.
Surfactants belonging to this class generally derive from oleochemistry.
Carboxylate salts (or soaps) are directly produced by the alkaline hydrolysis (or saponification)
of animal and vegetable glycerides and result from the neutralization of fatty acids.

=== Page 787 ===
Saturated sodium soaps are extremely soluble in water up to C8; those with chain lengths
approaching C18 become less soluble, and they are insoluble above C20.
Starting from C16 chain lengths, the fatty acids can be either saturated or unsaturated.
Unsaturated fatty acids are prone to undergo oxidation and form oxides and peroxides,
which cause rancidity and yellowing.
Potassium soaps and salts of alkanolamines are more fluid and also more soluble than
sodium salts.
The extremely low solubility of alkaline earth and heavy metals’ fatty acid salts make this
class of surfactants less appropriate for use in hard water.
The main application of fatty carboxylates is found in the soap bars widely used in the
world for fabric hand wash (generally based on tallow/coconut oil mixtures).
Water-soluble soaps are mainly used in skin cleansers (soap bars or liquids), shaving
products (sticks, foams, or creams), and deodorant sticks.
Mixtures of fatty acids and their salts are used in “acid soaps.”
Water-insoluble soaps form gels in nonaqueous systems and, because of their hydro-
phobicity, they can be appropriate surfactants for w/o emulsions.
Ester carboxylates.
This class of surfactants is a subcategory of the previously discussed
surfactant group based on carboxylic acids; they are monoesters of di- and tricarboxylic acids.
These esters are produced by condensation reactions involving different types of
molecules, either an alcohol with a polycarboxylic acid (e.g., tartric or citric acid) or a
hydroxyacid (e.g., lactic acid) with a carboxylic acid.
The reacting alcohol may have been previously ethoxylated.
Because of their good foaming properties and substantivity on the hair, ester carboxylates are
especially suitable in shampoos; in combination with alcohol ethoxy sulfates (AEOS), they
provide reduced skin irritation.
Short-chain lactylates (i.e., issued from lactyllactic acid) are substantive on the skin and
show humectant properties.
Ether carboxylates.
Alkyl polyglycol ether carboxylates are the best-known surfactants in
this category.
These surfactants are formed by the reaction of sodium chloracetate with ethoxylated alcohols.
Because of the addition of ethoxylated groups, ether carboxylates are more soluble in
water and less sensitive to water hardness compared with conventional soaps. Also, keeping
the best properties of nonionic surfactants, they do not exhibit any cloud point and show good
wetting and foam stability.
Ether carboxylates do not undergo hydrolysis in presence of alkali or acids.
Ether carboxylates are used as general emulsifier and emulsion stabilizers.
770
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 788 ===
In personal care, they impart mildness, creamy foaming, skin feel, and hair-conditioning
benefits. Therefore, they are especially suitable in shampoos in combination with alcohol ether
sulfates and possibly with cationics.
More recently, a new generation of alkyl glucose carboxylates is emerging. These
surfactants exhibit both the high mildness of alkyl polyglucoside (APG) surfactants and
additional attributes such as foaming and sensory benefits. A typical surfactant of this class is
the sodium lauryl glucose carboxylate.
Sulfates
Alkyl sulfates.
Alkyl sulfates are organic esters of sulfuric acid; they vary by the length of the
hydrocarbon chain and by the selected counterion.
Alkyl sulfates are produced by sulfation of the corresponding fatty alcohols.
The properties of alkyl sulfates depend mainly on the chain length and on the degree of
branching of the hydrocarbon chain as well as, to a smaller extent, on the nature of the
counterions.
They are generally good foamers, more especially in hard water; best foam characteristics
are obtained in the C12 to C14 chain length range.
Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) has a 12-carbon chain length and is one of the most common
surfactants. It is not well tolerated by the skin. When the chain length increases, i.e., in the C14
to C18 range, surfactant penetrability through the stratum corneum decreases along with its
irritation potential; but the foaming capacity is accordingly depressed. Chains with carbon
number lower than 12 are better tolerated by the skin than SLS but exhibit more pronounced
smell. Combination with other surfactants allows considerable improvement of the lauryl
sulfate compatibility with skin while keeping a good foam. SLS is, however, less frequently
used than its ethoxylated counterpart. Lauryl sulfate is available under the form of various
salts: SLS, ammonium lauryl sulfate (ALS), magnesium lauryl sulfate [Mg(LS)2] and
triethanolamine lauryl sulfate (TEALS). Skin tolerance of lauryl sulfates is as follows:
Mg(LS)2 > TEALS > SLS > ALS
Alkyl sulfates are used in cosmetics and personal care areas [e.g., diethanolamine (DEA) lauryl
sulfate in shampoos]; they are associated with other surfactants and improve foaming
characteristics of detergent systems.
Pure SLS is also used in oral care and incorporated in dental creams, essentially as a
foaming agent.
Alkyl ether sulfates.
Alkyl ether sulfates (AESs), which are also identified as AEOS, result
from the sulfation of an ethoxylated alcohol.
Compared with alkyl sulfates, the ether sulfates show higher water solubility, improved
foam stability in hard water, and better skin tolerance. The viscosity of surfactant solutions of
ether sulfates is much more sensitive to the presence of electrolytes than alkyl sulfates;
formulators often take advantage of this opportunity to bring liquid formulations to the
desired viscosity by simply adjusting the salt level (e.g., NaCl).
The higher the number of ethoxy groups (EOs) in the molecule, the lower the
surfactant’s ability to penetrate the stratum corneum, and the less irritant for skin it will be.
Similar ranking is true for eye irritation. Also, the foaming capacity decreases as ethoxylation
degree increases.
Surfactants
771

=== Page 789 ===
AESs are extensively used in personal products such as liquid soaps, shower gels, foam baths,
and, more especially, shampoos. Sodium lauryl ether sulfate (SLES) is today the most currently
used primary tensioactive, and more especially, under the forms SLES-2 EO and SLES-3 EO,
which combine good foaming and skin compatibility properties.
Amide ether sulfates.
The amide ether sulfates are obtained by sulfation of the
corresponding ethoxylated amide.
The magnesium salts foam well, and their skin compatibility is excellent.
Owing to their weak lipid removal effect, amide ether sulfates are used in very mild personal
cleaners.
Alkyl glyceride sulfates.
The best-known surfactant of this class is the cocomonoglyceride
sulfate (CMGS). It is obtained by transesterification of coconut oil with glycerol followed by a
sulfation with sulfur trioxide and a neutralization with sodium hydroxide.
This surfactant is very well designed for cosmetic and personal care products. Compared with
the corresponding AES, it shows similar foaming power. Because this surfactant acts as a foam
booster, it can be advantageously combined with APG. Such mixtures also show a thickening
ability induced by salt addition. CMGS is said to present a better skin compatibility profile
than ether sulfate or other anionic surfactants.
Sulfonates
On a chemical standpoint, there is an important difference between the previously discussed
alkyl sulfates and the alkyl sulfonates: in the former, the sulfur atom is linked to the carbon
chain via an oxygen atom, and in the latter, the sulfur atom is directly linked to the carbon
atom.
Alkyl sulfonates.
Three major types of alkyl sulfonates must be considered: the primary and
secondary paraffin sulfonates [PS and secondary alkyl sulfonate (SAS)] and the a-olefin
sulfonates (AOSs).
The paraffin sulfonates are water-soluble surfactants, good foamers, and good o/w
emulsifiers. Their solutions do not thicken easily upon salt addition. Therefore, they are
particularly appropriate to formulate fluid liquids or highly concentrated products.
The AOS have general properties fully comparable to LAS (see sect. “Alkyl-Aryl
Sulfonates”); they are good o/w emulsifiers, wetting, and foaming agents.
772
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 790 ===
Alkane sulfonates (PS and SAS) are mainly used in Europe in detergent products.
AOSs have been mainly used in Asia as surfactants for heavy- and light-duty laundry
detergents, synthetic soap bars, and household products. Because they are less irritating than
alkyl-aryl sulfonates, they have also been used in the United States in several personal
products (liquid soaps, bubble baths, and shampoos) as alternatives to alcohol ether sulfates.
They are also marginally used in oral care formulations.
Alkyl-aryl sulfonates.
Today, LAS (linear alkylbenzene sulfonate) is the most important
surfactant on a volume basis, but its use in personal care is very limited.
It is worth mentioning that some methyl or methyl-ethyl-substituted aryl sulfonates, i.e.,
sodium xylene, toluene, or cumene sulfonates (SXS, STS, or SCS, respectively), although not
showing typical surfactant properties are used as hydrotropes (i.e., solubilizing agents, which
decrease hydrophobic effects in aqueous systems).
LAS is a very cost-effective surfactant that is extensively used in a broad variety of detergents
for household, fabric care, institutional, and industrial products.
Because of its too high detersive action, LAS has a relatively low compatibility with skin
and is only scarcely used in cosmetics except in some anti-seborrheic preparations.
Sulfosuccinates.
Sulfosuccinates are the sodium salts of alkyl esters of sulfosuccinic acid;
they generally result from the condensation of maleic anhydride with a fatty alcohol, followed
by a sulfonation with sodium bisulfite NaHSO3. Some variants of sulfosuccinates are derived
from other substituted fatty molecules such as fatty alcohol ethoxylates, fatty amines (yielding
sulfosuccinamates), or fatty alkanolamides.
Monoesters disodium salts are the most common sulfosuccinates used in cosmetic applications.
Monoesters of alkanolamines (sulfosuccinamates) are milder than monoesters of fatty alcohols
(sulfosuccinates). Monoesters derived from ethoxylated alcohols or alkanolamides are
extensively used in personal products and especially in shampoos; they are known for their
mildness and skin irritation reduction when used in association with other anionic surfactants.
Surfactants
773

=== Page 791 ===
Sulfo fatty acid esters.
These surfactants are sometimes known under their abbreviated
names: FES, MES, and ASME, for fatty ester sulfonate, methyl ester sulfonate, and alpha sulfo
(or a-sulfo) methyl ester, respectively. Most of a-sulfo fatty acid esters derive from fatty acid
methyl esters.
a-Sulfo methyl ester surfactants deriving from C16 to C18 fatty acid (e.g., ASMT, the tallowate)
are appropriate for use in laundry detergents. ASME is also used in the formulation of syndet
bars (laundry bars based on synthetic surfactants).
To our knowledge, these surfactants are not used in personal care.
Fatty acid isethionates and taurides.
Fatty acid isethionates are usually prepared by reaction
of a fatty acid chloride with sodium isethionate
, itself resulting
from the addition of sodium bisulfite to ethylene oxide (EO). These surfactants are insensitive
to water hardness and show good wetting, foaming, and emulsifying properties. In addition,
they are very mild and have excellent compatibility with the skin. Taurides (or taurates) are
acyl–amino alkane sulfonates that have chemical structures close to isethionates. They can be
used in association with other surfactants to increase the viscosity.
Acyl isethionates have been used in shampoos and personal cleansers. They are also
incorporated in syndet bars together with various soaps. The most currently used isethionate is
the cocoyl isethionate.
Taurides (or taurates), which have properties similar to soaps (except the sensitivity to
water hardness), have been extensively used in shampoos but are now replaced by AEOS.
Today they are limitedly used in cosmetics mainly in foam baths and toilet bars.
Taurides are also used in soap bars especially designed for laundering with seawater, in
agriculture, and in textile dying.
Phosphates Esters
This class of surfactants includes alkyl phosphates and alkyl ether phosphates.
Phosphate esters as surfactants are especially useful in applications for which a
particular tolerance to pH, heat, or electrolytes is required. They are also used in acidic
cleaning products for household as well as industrial applications. Mild for the skin, alkyl
phosphates sometimes enter the composition of facial and cleansing products.
.
.
.
.
774
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 792 ===
Acyl–Amino Acids and Salts
Acyl glutamates.
These surfactants are formed by acylation of a natural amino acid, the
glutamic acid
(or a-aminoglutaric acid).
These surfactants are mild for the skin and the eyes, deliver improved skin feel, but are
poor foamers.
Acyl glutamates are mainly used in personal products such as shampoos.
Acyl peptides.
These surfactants are formed from hydrolyzed proteins (e.g., animal collagen).
Depending on the protein hydrolysis process (chemical or enzymatic), the average
polypeptide molecular weight can vary from about 350 to 2000, and some free amino acids
may be present in the hydrolysate. An acylation reaction occurs on the amine terminal
functions and, possibly, on some side groups (e.g., the hydroxyls) and thus leaves the carboxyl
groups free, which must be neutralized.
Products containing such surfactants are prone to be contaminated by various germs and
have to be properly preserved.
Acyl peptides are mild surfactants designed for the personal care area; they are especially used
in shampoos owing to their substantivity on the keratin of hair and, therefore, they effectively
deliver the expected benefits of conditioning agents.
Acyl sarcosides.
Sarcosinates (or salts of acyl–amino acids) are the condensation products of
fatty acids with N-methylglycine
(or sarcosine).
Sarcosinates are good surfactants for cosmetic use because of their mildness to skin,
substantivity on skin and hairs when incorporated in formulations around neutral pH,
conditioning action, and foaming resistance in the presence of soaps or sebum. Incorporated in
shampoos with alkyl sulfates, they boost the lather.
Sarcosinates are also used as corrosion inhibitors.
Cationic Surfactants
From a very general standpoint, cationic surfactants differ from anionic and nonionic ones by
the fact that they carry a positive charge. Their major interest in cosmetic industry resides in
hair care; in this frame, they are used as hair conditioners and antistatic agents.
Cationics are also found in the personal care area as emulsifiers in some cosmetic
preparations and as bactericidal agents.
Alkylamines
Primary, secondary, and tertiary alkyl amines, and more especially their salts, are included in
this surfactant class.
Surfactants
775

=== Page 793 ===
Amines and their salts are mainly used in textile treatment and occasionally in rinse fabric
softeners. Salts of amines are used in cosmetics together with other surfactants. Their usage is
restricted to specialties; they exhibit conditioning and antistatic properties in hair care
applications. Amidoamines are also used in cosmetic products.
Alkylimidazolines
Reaction of a fatty acid with a substituted ethylene diamine forms imidazoline. Heating the
resulting amido-ethylamine yields the imidazoline with a five-member substituted ring.
The tertiary nitrogen atom can be quaternized.
Imidazolines are cationic o/w emulsifiers.
Considered to be irritating, they are scarcely used in cosmetics as substantive hair-
conditioning agents.
Quaternary Ammonium Compounds
Quaternary ammonium compounds form a class of surfactants that contain a positively
charged nitrogen atom linked to four alkyl or aryl substituents.
The positive charge is permanent, regardless of pH.
Tetra alkyl(-aryl) ammonium salts.
Tetra alkyl ammonium salts have the structure
[R1R2R3R4Nþ] X– where R1, R2, R3, and R4 are alkyl or aryl groups and X– represents an
anion. The water solubility of quaternaries mainly depends on the nature of R substituents.
Low-solubility quaternaries can adsorb on various substrates and impart various useful
conditioning effects (softening, antistat, corrosion inhibition, etc.).
With the exception of N-alkyltrimethyl ammonium salts, quaternary surfactants usually
show poor detergency, wetting, and emulsifying capacities. Quaternaries are generally not
compatible with anionics because of the formation of water-insoluble complexes.
The major usage of quarternaries is related to their ability to adsorb on natural or synthetic
substrates and fibers. They are widely used as softening agents in rinse fabric softeners.
Their softening and antistatic properties are similarly exploited in hair-conditioning
shampoos or after-shampooing rinses.
776
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 794 ===
It is worth to note that, in cosmetic applications, quaternaries may cause ocular and local
irritation. Among quaternaries, some are used as germicides and disinfectants (e.g., didecyl
dimethyl ammonium chloride and benzalkonium chloride).
Heterocyclic ammonium salts.
Heterocyclic quaternaries are derived from heterocyclic
aliphatic or aromatic compounds in which a nitrogen atom constitutive of the cycle is quaternized.
The quaternaries derived from imidazoline and morpholine are used as hair conditioners and
antistatic agents. Those derived from aromatic heterocycles are used as germicides.
Alkyl betaines.
Alkyl betaines, which are N-trialkyl derivatives of amino acids ([R1R2R3]
NþCH2COOH), are classified as cationics because they exhibit a permanent positive charge.
Because they also have a functional group able to carry a negative charge in neutral and alkaline
pH conditions, they are often regarded, although this position is questionable, as amphoterics.
The positive charge is always carried by a quaternized nitrogen, while the anionic site can be
a carboxylate (betaine), a sulfate (sulfobetaine or sultaine), or a phosphate (phosphobetaine or
phostaine).
Betaines are good foaming, wetting, and emulsifying surfactants, especially in the
presence of anionics. Alkylamido betaines deliver more stable foam and are better viscosifiers
than alkyl dimethyl betaines. Betaines are compatible with other surfactants, and they
frequently form mixed micelles; these mixtures often deliver unique properties that are not
found in the individual constitutive surfactants.
Betaines have low eye irritation and skin irritation; moreover, the presence of betaines is
known to decrease the irritation effect of anionics.
Because of their ability to improve the skin’s tolerance against irritating anionic surfactants,
and also, because of their high price, betaines are usually used in association with other
surfactants.
Betaines are especially suitable in personal care applications (e.g., shampoos, foam baths,
liquid soaps, shower gels), fabric hand wash products, and dishwashing products.
Quaternized APG.
These surfactants, derived from natural sources, are recently available.
They are made of alkyl polyglycoside with a cationic backbone. These very mild quaternary
compounds are substantive to the skin and hair and provide a soft after feel. Thanks to the
sugar moiety, they show low irritation potential, and therefore, they are particularly suitable
Surfactants
777

=== Page 795 ===
for personal care formulations. A major benefit is a longer-lasting effect associated with a
reduction of irritation compared with traditional quaternary surfactants.
Some potential applications reside in hair care products (e.g., in wet combing benefit,
flyaway hair control), w/o cationic emulsions, formulations in the presence of anionics, foam
building in shampoo formulations, or surfactants for baby wipes.
Ethoxylated Alkylamines
These surfactants can be considered as cationic or nonionic depending on the degree of
ethoxylation and the pH at which they are used. Polyethoxylated amines are formed by
ethoxylation of primary or secondary fatty amines.
The ethoxylated alkylamines have various application fields; they are generally exploited for
their capacity of adsorbing on surfaces.
In personal care, ethoxylated alkylamines are used as emulsifiers and hair-conditioning
agents.
Ethoxylated amidoamines find applications in rinse fabric softeners.
Esterified Quaternaries
Esterified quaternaries (or esterquats) are produced by the esterification of the hydroxyl group
(s) of secondary or tertiary amino-alcohols with selected fatty acids.
The esterquats are suitable substitutes for straight quaternaries; they present improved
environmental profile and comparable softening properties compared with straight quater-
naries.
Amphoteric Surfactants
Amphoteric surfactants are characterized by the fact that these surfactants can carry both a
positive charge on a cationic site and a negative charge on an anionic site. The use of
amphoteric terminology is still more restrictive: the charge of the molecule must change with
pH, showing a zwitterionic form at intermediate pH (i.e., around the isoelectric point).
The surfactant properties are accordingly influenced by pH: around the isoelectric point,
the zwitterionic form takes place, exhibiting the lowest solubility; in alkaline conditions, the
anionic form is predominant, delivering foam and detergency; and in acidic conditions, the
cationic form prevails, providing surfactant substantivity.
Although betaines are commonly classified among amphoterics, this classification is
improper because these surfactants never exhibit in single anionic form.
Amphoteric surfactants are generally used as secondary tensioactives for their foam-
stabilizing effect, their thickening capacity, and their skin irritation reduction capacity on alkyl
sulfates and alkyl ethoxy sulfates.
778
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 796 ===
Acyl Ethylenediamines and Derivatives
These surfactants are made by the reaction of an alkyl imidazoline with chloroacetic acid
(yielding amphoglycinates) or with acrylic acid (yielding amphopropionates).
Amphoterics of this class are mainly used in personal products (e.g., coco amphocarboxy
glycinate). Incorporated in baby shampoos, they reduce eye irritation.
Other applications are fabric softeners, industrial cleaners, and car cleaners.
N-Alkyl Amino Acids or Imino Diacids
These molecules are chemical derivatives of amino acids that can be produced by the reaction
of chloroacetic acid or acrylic acid with an alkyl amine.
Their compatibility with other surfactants is excellent.
These surfactants are good emulsifiers and show optimal wetting and detergency under
alkaline pH. They are good foamers at neutral and alkaline pH but lose their foaming
properties under acidic conditions.
They are substantive to surfaces and provide antistatic effects.
They provide skin and eye irritancy reduction in combination with anionics.
Amphoterics of this class are mainly used in personal products.
Polycarboxylates deliver reduced eye irritation and provide hair-conditioning benefits.
Their zwitterionic forms are substantive on the hairs.
NONIONIC SURFACTANTS
Nonionic surfactants do not dissociate into ions in aqueous medium. They generally deliver a
weak to moderate foam. They are appreciated for their good skin and eye compatibility as well
as for their anti-irritant potential when they are combined with anionics in appropriate
concentration ratio. Therefore numerous products for sensitive skin, babies, or the face
incorporate nonionics as major surfactant.
Fatty Alcohols
Fatty alcohols are primarily used as a chemical precursor for the production of several other
surfactants.
.
.
.
.
Surfactants
779

=== Page 797 ===
Because they are not water soluble, the use of fatty alcohols is very limited in liquid products.
They are mainly used as opacifiers, thickening agents, and foam depressors (e.g., lauric alcohol).
Ethers
Alkoxylated Alcohols
This class of surfactants mainly covers ethoxylated or propoxylated alcohols.
Ethoxylated alcohols (also called “polyethyleneglycol ethers” or “PEG ethers”) are
produced from the reaction of fatty alcohols with EO.
Similarly, propoxylated alcohols (also called “polypropyleneglycol ethers” or “PPG
ethers”) are obtained with propylene oxide (PO).
The hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB) of ethoxylated alcohols can be adjusted by
properly balancing the hydrophilic ethoxylated chain and the hydrophobic fatty chain.
Ethoxylate nonionics are compatible with all surfactants. Some beneficial associations
with ionic surfactants are often shown.
In the frame of personal care applications, ethoxylated alcohols often result from the
transformation of natural lipids. The nomenclature specific to cosmetic chemicals [i.e.,
international nomenclature of cosmetic ingredients (INCI) namesa] is applied to these
nonionics: they are denominated by using the root of the fatty acid name terminated by the
suffix “-eth” (contraction of “ethoxylated”), directly followed by the ethoxylation degree (e.g.,
laureth-4, oleth-5, and myristeth-7).
As some raw materials yield on hydrolysis various fatty chain lengths, the names of the
derived nonionics are either drawn from the natural source (e.g., laneth-16 for a lanolin-
derived nonionic) or from the combined abbreviations of the constitutive fatty chains (e.g.,
ceteareth-20 for a combination of cetyl and stearyl).
(e.g., laureth 20 for x = 11 and n = 20)
(e.g., propyleneglycol capreth-4 for x = 9, y = 1, and z = 4)
Applications of ethoxylated alcohols are numerous in industrial as well as in household
products.
When properly selected, alkoxylated alcohols are also useful for personal products as
good emulsifiers and solubilizers. The cosmetic applications remain, however, limited because
of their rather weak foaming capacity.
Because they are prone to undergo degradation by oxidation, the following precautions
can greatly improve the stability of ethoxylate nonionics: storage in the dark, minimal air
contact, low-temperature storage, avoiding storage of diluted products, and the addition of an
antioxidant.
EO/PO Block Polymers
These polymeric surfactants have some similarity with the previously discussed alkoxylated
alcohols. They consist in the combination of the assembly of PPG (hydrophobic part) and PEG
chains (hydrophilic part). Such surfactants are known under the denomination “poloxamers”
(INCI name) and are called EO/PO block copolymer nonionics.
A major property of EO/PO nonionics is their low-foaming profile.
As straight EO nonionics, EO/PO copolymers exhibit the cloud point phenomena.
aThe International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary provides a nomenclature of conventional names for cosmetic
ingredients that are defined by the CTFA (The Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association).
780
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 798 ===
EO/PO nonionics are also mild surfactants.
These surfactants are especially useful for applications in which foaming must be significantly
depressed, such as automatic dishwashing detergents, laundry detergents, and rinse aids.
Owing to their mildness, EO/PO block polymers also find applications in cosmetic
products. They are generally used as emulsifying, solubilizing, or fluidizing agents.
APGs
Alkyl polyglycosides are most often known by the simple abbreviation APGs.
APGs are produced by the alkylation of short-chain glucosides resulting from acidic
alcoholysis of polysaccharides such as starch. Commercial products consist of mixtures of
mono-, di-, and triglucosides. Accordingly the glucosidic average chain length varies between
1.2 and 3 glucose units, depending on the production conditions.
Surfactants of this class are good emulsifiers and provide good wetting and foam profile.
APGs are compatible with all other surfactants. They show good chemical stability at
neutral and alkaline pH, and are impaired under acidic conditions (pH < 5).
APGs are used in detergents and personal care cleansers (e.g., shampoos). They are claimed to
be very mild for skin as well as to reduce the skin irritation potential of anionics. Additionally,
they impart an excellent skin feel.
Their thickening effect in the presence of anionics and their foam stabilization capacity
are also exploited in personal care applications.
APGs made from fully natural and renewable sources are now available, the glycosidic
chain being made from corn, potato, or wheat starch and the alkyl chain from coconut and/or
palm oil. Such surfactants are readily biodegradable and approved for eco labels (e.g., EU
Flower, Nordic Swan, and Bra Miljo¨val).
Ethoxylated Oils and Fats
This class of surfactants essentially covers ethoxylated derivatives of lanolin (i.e., aliphatic
alcohols and sterols and fractionation products of wool fat) and of castor oil (i.e., fatty acids
with a high ricinoleic acid fraction extracted from ricinus seeds).
Ethoxylated products of lanolin and castor oil are good and excellent emulsifiers, respectively.
These surfactants are mainly used in the cosmetic industry; their major interest is to allow
claims based on the natural origin of the constitutive surfactant systems.
Surfactants
781

=== Page 799 ===
Alkanolamides
Straight Alkanolamides
Alkanolamides are N-acyl derivatives of monoethanolamine and diethanolamine.
Alkanolamides have been largely used in household detergent products; their consumption has
now significantly declined because of the extensive use of alkyl ethoxylated detergent products.
Because of their foam boosting and viscosity-enhancing capacity in the presence of
anionics, alkanolamides are also usefully incorporated in personal care, especially in shampoos.
Ethoxylated Alkanolamides
Reaction of an alkanolamide with EO leads to an ethoxylated amide.
It is more expensive than its corresponding ethoxylated alcohol and has therefore restricted
usage. The benefits of thickening, foam stabilization, and dispersibility are exploited in
personal care cleansers.
Esters
In this surfactant class, there are five major subcategories to be considered:
1.
Ethoxylated fatty acids
2.
Glycol esters, glycerol esters, and ethoxylated derivatives
3.
Sorbitan esters and ethoxylated derivatives
4.
Alkyl carbohydrates esters
5.
Triesters of phosphoric acid
Ethoxylated Fatty Acids
This class of surfactants comprises mono- and diester that result from the reaction of fatty acids
with either EO or polyethylene glycol.
Given their outstanding emulsifying properties, ethoxylated fatty acids are useful in domestic
and industrial detergents, more especially in degreasing compositions.
If properly balanced, combinations of esters with low and high ethoxylation provide
excellent emulsifiers for creams and lotions. They are also used as mild cleaners or viscosifying
agents (e.g., PEG-150-distearate).
In cosmetics (shampoos), less water-soluble grade (i.e., ethylene glycol monostearate) is
used as a pearlescent agent.
782
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 800 ===
Glycol Esters, Glycerol Esters, and Ethoxylated Derivatives
A common point among the surfactants grouped in this class and the following two classes
(sorbitan esters and alkyl carbohydrates esters) is that they all derive from the condensation
reaction of a polyhydroxyl compound (e.g., glycol, glycerol, sorbitol, sucrose) with a fatty acid.
Some of them can be directly extracted from natural sources.
The resulting esters can be additionally ethoxylated to increase their HLB value and,
thereby, their solubility in water.
These surfactants show poorer wetting and foaming properties in comparison with
alcohol-derived nonionics. Emulsifying properties are excellent.
In general, esters and lower ethoxylates are appropriate for w/o dispersions, whereas
higher ethoxylates are more suitable emulsifiers for o/w dispersions.
Because of their high compatibility, these surfactants are widely used in the cosmetic and food
industry.
Glycol and glycerol esters are used in the pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries either
as emulsifying agents or as oily compounds, refatting agents, emollients and skin conditioners
in various products such as creams, lotions, ointments, and gels.
Stearate derivatives also deliver thickening and opacifying properties (e.g., the glyceryl
stearate). Some of them are also used as pearlescent agents (i.e., glycol stearate and distearate).
Ethoxylated derivatives are used as solubilizing agents, emulsifiers, and even as
emollients. Some show effective thickening effect when combined with other surfactants (e.g.,
PEG-200 glyceryl stearate)
Sorbitan and Sorbitol Esters and Ethoxylated Derivatives
Sorbitan molecule is generated from the dehydration of the sorbitol molecule, which results in
an internal ether bond.
.
.
Surfactants
783

=== Page 801 ===
Sorbitol and sorbitan esters are obtained by acylation of hydroxyl groups, using most
frequently natural fatty acids such as lauric, palmitic, stearic, or oleic. These surfactants can be
optionally ethoxylated. Acylation (or ethoxylation) can occur on almost all hydroxyl groups
present in the original polyol molecule.
The field of application of sorbitan esters and their ethoxylated derivatives is identical to the
one of glycol and glycerol esters (see the sect. “Glycol Esters, Glycerol Esters, and Ethoxylated
Derivatives”).
The sorbitol esters with a higher degree of ethoxylation (e.g., sorbitol septaoleate 40 EO)
are also used as spreading aids in emollient bath oils.
Alkyl Carbohydrates Esters
Surfactants of this class are better known as “sugar esters” or “sucrose esters.”
The sucrose esters are obtained by transesterification of sucrose with fatty acid methyl
esters or triglycerides.
Surfactants of this class are good emulsifiers.
Of great interest about such surfactants is their natural origin and good biodegradability.
It is worth noting that some glucosides surfactants, e.g., the so-called saponins, are
already present in nature and directly available from vegetal sources.
Sucrose esters are food grade ingredients and have similar uses as the previously described
glycol, glycerol, and sorbitan esters in the food and cosmetic industries.
They are very mild surfactants and can be used as emulsifiers or as cleansing agents with
emollient properties.
Amine Oxides
Amine oxides are produced by the oxidation of tertiary amines using a 35% hydrogen peroxide
solution as the oxidizing agent.
Amine oxides remain mainly nonionic in neutral and alkaline conditions (pH >7) but can
become weakly cationic under acidic conditions.
In current amine oxides, the initial reactive are alkyl dimethyl amines with chain lengths
ranging from C12 to C18.
Amine oxides are compatible with all other surfactants.
Amine oxides are also known to increase the skin compatibility of detergent products.
784
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 802 ===
A small amount of amine oxide increases the cloud point of nonionics.
Incorporated in shampoos, amine oxides contribute to impart viscosity, reduce eye and skin
irritancy, and enhance foam properties (more creamy). They are especially suitable in slightly
acidic or neutral formulas.
NON-HYDROCARBON SPECIALTY SURFACTANTS
Alkoxylated Polysiloxanes
Surfactants, which can be classified in the chemical group of organosilicones, are structurally
derived from polydimethylsiloxanes in which some methyl are replaced by hydrophilic
groups that can be of anionic, cationic, or nonionic nature.
The nonionic derivatives are mostly represented by the polyether-polydimethylsiloxane
copolymers.
The general structure of these surfactants is illustrated below. The hydrophilic chain(s)
generally contains EO/PO block copolymers.
These surfactants are specialty ingredients and are used in very different fields (e.g., painting,
foam control, phytosanitary products).
They are also used in cosmetics and hair care:
l In cosmetic or personal care products as emulsifiers (e.g., in protective creams,
hydrating body milks, liquid soaps, and shave creams) and
l In hair care products (e.g., shampoos, conditioners, gels, lotions, and foams) to act as
combing out auxiliaries, reduce the irritancy of surfactant system, provide improved
skin feel, or control the foam. The CTFA-adopted name of these surfactants is
dimethicone copolyol.
Fluorosurfactants
Fluorosurfactants form a distinct group of surfactants besides the conventional surfactants
based on hydrocarbon chains.
Fluorosurfactants differ from hydrocarbon surfactants by the hydrophobic moiety of the
molecule, which is made of perfluoroalkyls chains F–(CF2–CF2)n–, in which n ranges from
about 3 to 8.
As for conventional surfactants, a broad variety of hydrophilic functional groups (e.g.,
ethoxylated chains, sulfonates, quaternaries, and betaines) can be grafted on fluorosurfactants.
Depending on their nature, these surfactants show variable emulsifying and foaming
characteristics.
Although fluorosurfactants have some potential prospects in personal care (e.g.,
improved hair conditioning), we are not aware of any significant application in this field.
We can, however, report their use in barrier creams that require good spreading and stable
o/w emulsions.
Surfactants
785

=== Page 803 ===
FURTHER READING
Rieger MM. Surfactant Encyclopedia. 2nd ed. Carol Stream: Allured Publishing, 1996.
Ash M, Ash I. Handbook of Industrial Surfactants. An international Guide to More Than 16.000 Products
by Trade Name, Application, Composition and Manufacturer. Aldershot: Gower, 1993.
Falbe J. Surfactants in Consumer products. Theory, Technology and Application. Berlin/New York:
Springer, 1987.
Lange KR. Detergents and Cleaners: A Handbook for Formulators. Mu¨nchen: Hanser Publishers, 1994.
Porter MR. Handbook of Surfactants. London: Blackie Academic & Professional, 1991.
786
Oldenhove de Guertechin

=== Page 804 ===
72
Encapsulation to Deliver Topical Actives
Joce´lia Jansen
Pharmaceutical Science Department, State University of Ponta Grossa, Ponta Grossa, Parana´, Brazil
INTRODUCTION
The insertion of active ingredients into protective boundaries that can isolate, disperse,
mobilize, enhance activity, and transport these ingredients in different barriers has been and is
a very important tool for the cosmetics industry.
The effects of encapsulation on the performance of ingredients can be rated by the
following criteria:
l Transport them across biological media,
l Increase their active lifetime,
l Improve ingredients’ solubility in desired media,
l Protect the body from possible poisonous side effects of ingredients, and
l Concentrate active ingredients in the desired biological target area.
Various encapsulation systems have been studied successfully in the past 30 years, with
the aim of controlling the drug release and improving the efficacy and selectivity of the
formulations. Among the techniques, nanotechnology is one of the most prominent factors of
the scientific revolution we are witnessing. Good reviews, including topical applications, are
made in literature (1–6). As for biotechnology, nanotechnology is the outcome of an
interdisciplinary, new approach to old technological issues ranging from device manufactur-
ing to drug design.
Nanotechnology is considered by many as the logical step in science, integrating
engineering with biology, chemistry, and physics (7). Nanometric systems have a great surface
area, which renders them highly satisfactory for application on the skin (8). In the last couple of
years, the term “nanotechnology” has been inflated and has almost become synonymous for
things that are innovative and highly promising. On the other hand, it is also the subject of
considerable debate regarding the open question on toxicological and environmental impact
(9,10).
The various nano formulations currently being used in cosmetics are
l nanoemulsions (submicron-sized emulsions)
l nanosuspensions (submicron-sized suspensions)
l nanospheres (drug nanoparticles in polymer matrix)
l nanotubes (sequence of C60 atoms arranged in a long thin cylindrical structure)
l nanopowders
l nanocapsules (encapsulated drug nanoparticles)
l lipid nanoparticles (lipid monolayer enclosing a solid lipid core)
l dendrimers (nanoscale three-dimensional macromolecules of polymer)
In this chapter, an overview of various methods of encapsulation including micro-
particles, nanotechnology, vesicles and special emulsions are given, as well as their advantages
and limitations for topical applications.
MICROPARTICLES
Microencapsulation is a process in which very thin coatings of inert natural or synthetic
polymeric materials are deposited around micro-sized particles of solids or droplets of
liquids.

=== Page 805 ===
Commercial microparticles typically have a diameter between 1 and 1000 mm and contain
10 to 90 wt.% core. Most capsule shell materials are organic polymers, but fat and wax are also
used. Various types of physical structure of the product of microencapsulation such as
mononuclear spheres, multinuclear spheres, multinuclear irregular particles, etc., can be
obtained depending on the manufacturing process.
A thorough description of the formation of microparticles is given by several reviews
(11–14).
The efficacy of microparticles into the human skin depends on the size and the type of
the formulation with which they are topically applied. Microparticles with a diameter of >1
mm do not penetrate the human skin. They are located on the skin surface and form a film,
which can be used for protection against ultraviolet (UV) radiation in sunscreens, among other
examples. While the penetration of the microparticles in the lipid layers of the stratum
corneum is limited, they penetrate efficiently into the hair follicles up to a depth of >2 mm
(15,16).
Concerning microsponge systems, each microsphere is composed of thousands of small
beads wrapped together to form a microscopic sphere capable of binding, suspending, or
entrapping a range of substances.
Skin absorption of benzoyl peroxide from a topical lotion containing freely dispersed
drug was compared with that of the same lotion in which the drug was entrapped in a
controlled-release styrene-divinylbenzene polymer system (Microsponge1). The studies done
by Wester et al. (17) showed (i) in vivo, less benzoyl peroxide was absorbed through rhesus
monkey skin from the polymeric system, (ii) reduced skin irritation in cumulative irritancy
studies in rabbits and human, and (iii) when the experimental formulations were evaluated for
antimicrobial activity in vivo, their efficacy was in line with that of conventional products.
Jelvehgari et al. (18) showed that the drug-polymer ratio influenced the particle size and
drug release behavior of microsponges. An increase in the ratio resulted in a reduction of the
release rate of benzoyl peroxide attributed to the microsponge’s decreased internal porosity.
The cidofovir distribution in porcine skin, after topical application of microparticles and
drug solution, was determined by horizontal slicing of the skin. The amount of cidofovir found
in the epidermis was higher with microparticles than with the control solution, and the
quantity retained decreased with depth (19).
Scalia et al. (20) loaded lipid microparticles with the sunscreen agent 4-methylbenzy-
lidene camphor (4-MBC). The influence of the microparticle’s carrier system on percutaneous
penetration was evaluated after its introduction in a topical formulation (emulsion).
The amount of sunscreen penetrating the stratum corneum was greater for the emulsion
containing nonencapsulated 4-MBC compared with the formulation with the sunscreen-loaded
microparticles.
Lipid microparticles loaded with butyl methoxydibenzoylmethane (BMDBM) were
prepared and evaluated for skin permeation in vivo and in vitro. Following in vivo human
skin application of an oil-in-water (O/W) emulsion containing 2% of BMDBM loaded in
lipospheres, 15% of the applied sunscreen was found accumulated in the uppermost layers of
the stratum corneum (21).
On the basis of this literature, it can be concluded that the general release of active
substances from microparticulate systems is directly or indirectly related to some factors:
l The presence of pores in the microparticulate system; a good example is provided by
microsponges.
l Particle size: particles with >1 mm are retained in the skin surface or deposited on the
surface of the hair follicles.
l Intrinsic characteristics of delivery systems being directly related to the process and
materials used.
NANOPARTICLES
Nanoparticles can be defined as submicron (<1 mm) colloidal systems, generally, but not
necessarily made of polymers (biodegradable or not). According to the preparation process
used, nanocapsules or nanospheres can be obtained. Nanocapsules are vesicular systems in
788
Jansen

=== Page 806 ===
which the drug is confined to a cavity surrounded by a unique polymeric membrane.
Nanospheres are matrix systems in which the drug is dispersed throughout the particles.
There are many methods for preparing nanoparticles, whereas the most common
methods are the required polymerization reaction or from a preformed polymer.
Good reviews with methods of preparation for nanoparticles can be found in the
literature (6,22–25). Other reviews (26,27) reports that the system of solid lipid nanoparticles
(SLNs) is one of the most attractive systems for encapsulating cosmetic ingredients.
Drug release from colloidal carriers is dependent on both the type of carrier and the
loading mechanisms involved.
Nanospheres
Release from nanospheres may be different according to the drug entrapment mechanism
involved. When the drug is superficially adsorbed, the release mechanism can be described as
a partitioning process (rapid and total release if sink conditions are met). When the drug is
entrapped within the matrix, diffusion plus bioerosion will be involved with a biodegradable
carrier, whereas diffusion will be the only mechanism if the carrier is not biodegradable. The
entrapment rate within the matrix of nanospheres may lead to a sustained release, which may
be related to the polymer’s biodegradation rate.
Nanocapsules
Release from nanocapsules is related to partitioning processes within immiscible phases. The
equilibrium between the carrier (loaded drug) and the dispersing aqueous medium (free drug)
is dependent both on the partition coefficient of the molecule between the oily and aqueous
phases, and on the volume ratio of these two phases. This means that the amount released is
directly related to the dilution of the carrier and that release is practically instantaneous when
sink conditions exist.
Because of the increasing use of nanotechnology, the number of papers on topical
nanoparticles has increased proportionally. Following is a short summary of some of these
works.
Shim et al. (28) evaluated the effect of size of self-assembled nanoparticles on skin
penetration of minoxidil in vitro and in vivo. Self-assembled 40 and 130 nm nanoparticles were
prepared with poly (caprolactone)-block-poly(ethyleneglycol) and applied onto the skin of
both hairy and hairless guinea pigs in the Franz diffusion cell. In hairy guinea pig skin, the
permeation of the minoxidil incorporated in 40 nm nanoparticles was 1.5-fold higher in the
epidermal layer and 1.7-fold higher in the receptor solution than that of 130 nm nanoparticles.
Lombardi et al. (29) describe techniques to characterize drug loading to carrier systems
and skin penetration profiles by using the lipophilic dye nile red as a model agent. Nile red
was incorporated into the lipid matrix of SLNs and nanostructured lipid. Nile red
concentrations were followed by image analysis of vertical sections of pigskin treated with
dye-loaded nanoparticular dispersions and an O/W cream for four and eight hour in vitro.
Following the SLNs dispersions, dye penetration increased about over fourfold. Nano-
structured lipid carriers turned out to be less potent (<3-fold increase), and penetration
appeared even more reduced when applying nanoemulsions.
Trimethylpsoralen (TMP) permeates moderately the skin barrier. Three formulations
were performed. Each form (liposomes, nanospheres, and EtOH solution) contained 0.05% of
TMP. The results indicated that the controlled release of TMP by incorporation into PLG
nanospheres [poly (DL-lactide-co-glycolide)] may increase drug content in the skin, while
maintaining a minimal percutaneous absorption (30).
The nature of the vehicle used can enhance or block the percutaneous absorption of UV
filters. Luppi et al. (31) suggested that polymeric nanoparticles hydrophobically modified
(polyvinyl alcohol with fatty acids) were able to prevent benzophenone-3 movement toward
the skin. Nanoparticles prepared with a high degree of substitution (fatty acids) prevented
benzophenone-3 percutaneous absorption.
Santos Maia et al. (32) incorporated prednicarbate [(PC), 0.25%] into SLNs of various
compositions. Conventional PC cream of 0.25% and ointment served as reference. Local
tolerability as well as drug penetration and metabolism were studied in excised human skin and
reconstructed epidermis. The drug recovery from the acceptor medium was about 2% of the
applied amount following PC cream and ointment, but 6.65% following nanoparticle dispersion.
Encapsulation to Deliver Topical Actives
789

=== Page 807 ===
The influence of cross-linked pullulan nanoparticles on human dermal fibroblasts in
vitro has been assessed in terms of cell adhesion, cytotoxicity, and light microscopy. Results
from cell adhesion/viability assay suggest that the pullulan nanoparticles are nontoxic to cells
and do not cause any distinct harm to cells. Fibroblasts were healthy and maintained their
morphology and adhesion capacity (33).
Wissing (34) showed that the crystalline cetylpalmitate in SLNs has the ability of
reflecting and scattering UV radiation on their own, thus leading to photoprotection without
the need for molecular sunscreens. The photoprotective effect after the incorporation of the
molecular sunscreen 2-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzophenone (Eusolex1 4360) into the SLN
dispersion was increased threefold compared with a reference emulsion. Further, film
formation on the skin was investigated by scanning electron microscopy, showing particle
fusion due to water evaporation and formation of a dense film.
In another study (35), the same team showed the influence of the carrier on the release
rate in vitro. It could be decreased by up to 50% with the SLN formulation. In vivo, penetration
of oxybenzone into stratum corneum on the forearm was investigated by the tape-stripping
method. It showed that the rate of release is strongly dependent upon formulation and could
be decreased by 30% to 60% in SLN formulations.
SLN dispersions with different crystallinity indices of the lipid matrix were produced.
Their characterization and occlusion factor were determined after 6, 24, and 48 hours. It was
shown that the occlusion factor depends strongly on the degree of the crystallinity of the lipid
matrix (36).
The actual sunscreens contain nanoparticles of titanium dioxide (TiO2) or zinc oxide
(ZnO), which are colorless and reflect UV. Most available data suggest that insoluble nano-
particles do not penetrate human skin. In vitro cytotoxicity studies on TiO2 report uptake by
cells, oxidative cell damage, or genotoxicity that should be interpreted with caution, since such
toxicities may be secondary to phagocytosis of the cells exposed to high concentrations of
insoluble particles.
There is little evidence that smaller particles have greater effects on the skin. Overall, the
current knowledge suggests that nanomaterials such as nano-sized vesicles or TiO2 and ZnO
nanoparticles currently used in cosmetic preparations or sunscreens pose no risk to human
skin or health, although other nanoparticles may have properties that warrant safety
evaluation on a case-by-case basis before human use (37).
Other nanoscale materials such as carbon fullerene have been used in some cosmetic
products because of their antioxidative properties. Bianco et al. (38) showed a good review on
functionalized carbon nanotubes that are emerging as new tools in the field of nanobiotechnology
and nanomedicine. They can be easily manipulated and modified by encapsulation with
biopolymers or by covalent linking of solubilizing groups to the external walls and tips.
Certain chemical forms of fullerenes have been reported to elicit oxidative damage to cell
in culture experiments (39). Adverse effects have not been reported following the application of
fullerenes in formulations such as topically applied lotions or creams. Two studies are often cited
about fullerenes, Oberdorster (40) and Zhu et al. (41) reported toxicity in many aquatic species
treated with fullerenes in water. It is important to mention that the toxicological potential of
nanoscale materials such as fullerenes can be evaluated through current safety evaluation
processes, and these materials should be only used in products once their safety is confirmed.
Dendrimers are artificial macromolecules, which have the structure of a tree. They are
hyperbranched and monodispersed three-dimensional molecules with defined molecular
weights, large numbers of functional groups on the surface, and well-established host-guest
entrapment properties. Dendrimers may be engineered to meet the specific needs of
biologically active agents, which can either be encapsulated within dendrimers or chemically
attached to these units. Recently, dendrimers have successfully proved themselves as
promising nanocarriers for drug delivery because they can render drug molecules a greater
water solubility, bioavailability, and biocompatibility (42,43).
Finally, DNA vaccines have been shown to elicit both broad humoral and cellular immune
responses. Recent human clinical studies with needle-free injection devices and the gene gun
have validated the direct targeting concept of dendritic cells (Langerhan’s cells) in the viable
epidermis of the skin. Cui and Mumper (44) showed that several different chitosan-based
nanoparticles containing plasmide DNA (pDNA) resulted in both quantifiable levels of
luciferase expression in mouse skin 24 hours after topical application as well as significant
790
Jansen

=== Page 808 ===
antigen-specific Immunoglobulin G (IgG) titers at 28 days. In another study (45), the same
authors showed that pDNA-coated nanoparticles, especially the mannan-coated pDNA
nanoparticles with DOPE (dioleoyl phosphatidyl ethanolamine), resulted in significant
enhancement in both antigen-specific IgG titers (16 fold) and splenocyte proliferation over
“naked” pDNA alone.
Regarding the action mode of nanoparticles, we can say that they are associated with the
skin surface, facilitating drug transport by changing the vehicle/stratum corneum partition
coefficient.
NANOEMULSIONS
The main characteristic of nanoemulsions is the droplet size that must be inferior to 1 mm.
Usually, the average droplet size is between 100 and 500 nm. The particles can exist as water-
in-oil (W/O) and O/W forms where the core of the particle is either water or oil,
respectively. The terms “submicron emulsion” (SME) and “miniemulsion” are used as
synonyms. Usually, nanoemulsions contain 10% to 20% oil stabilized with 0.5% to 2% of an
emulsifyng agent.
Emulsions prepared by use of conventional apparatus, e.g., electric mixers and
mechanical stirrers, show large droplet sizes and wide particle distribution. The techniques
usually employed to prepare nanoemulsions involve the utilization of ultrasound, evaporation
of solvents (46), PIT (phase-inversed temperature) method (47), two-stage homogenizer (48,49),
and the microfluidizer (50,51).
In recent years, nanoemulsions have been gaining more and more attention in the
cosmetic industry, which has rapidly grasped its benefits. The patents assert that these systems
penetrate through the skin to a greater extent compared with usual topical compositions.
Nanoemulsions are so strongly compressed that they become ultralight and, like vesicular
systems, constitute a new form that could prove extremely fruitful for the release of substances.
Nanoemulsions have a much higher surface area and free energy than macroemulsions,
which make them an effective transport system. They can be formulated in a variety of
formulations such as foams, creams, liquids, and sprays.
Many studies have shown that nanoemulsion formulation processes improved both
transdermal and dermal delivery properties in vitro (52–55) as well as in vivo (56,57).
The determination of silicones and hydrogenated didecenes deposited on human hair
from shampoo applications is described by Haake et al. (58). A transparent shampoo
containing 1.8% of hydrogenated didecenes delivered via a nanoemulsion showed a good
performance profile.
The penetration of octyl methoxycinnamate formulated in nanocapsules was compared
with one obtained from a nanoemulsion and one from a conventional O/W emulsion. The
percutaneous penetration, assessed by the tape-stripping technique, demonstrated that nano-
emulsion increased the extent of octyl methoxycinnamate penetration. The accumulation in the
skin was significantly greater with nanoemulsion than with emulsion or nanocapsules (59).
Calderilla-Fajardo et al. (60) evaluated the influence of sucrose laureate and sucrose
oleate on in vivo percutaneous penetration of octyl methoxycinnamate. The sunscreen agent
was formulated in nanoemulsions, nanocapsules, and conventional O/W emulsions. The
results showed that nanoemulsions of sucrose laureate exhibited the highest stratum corneum
penetration compared with the other formulations.
The skin transport of inulin incorporated in O/W nanoemulsions was found to be
significantly higher (5–15-fold) than that obtained with micellar dispersions or aqueous
controls. The results suggest that W/O nanoemulsions are more compatible with the lipophilic
sebum environment of the hair follicle (61,62).
VESICLES
In the 1960s, Bangham et al. (63) clearly demonstrated that the dispersion of natural
phospholipids in aqueous solutions leads to the formation of “closed vesicles structures,”
which morphologically resemble cells. Since 1975 (64), vesicles have been prepared from
Encapsulation to Deliver Topical Actives
791

=== Page 809 ===
surfactants. Mezei and Gulasekharam (65) published the first paper to report the effectiveness
of liposomes in the skin.
In 1986, the first commercial product incorporating liposomes appeared on the market
(Capture1). At the same time, a synthetic one made by nonionic surfactants (66) was also
launched (Niosomes1).
These microscopic vesicles contain from one to several concentric lipid bilayers with
intercalated aqueous compartments. Transepidermal penetration of the content of vesicles is
proportional to the “fluidity” of their lipids and negative charge. Several drugs and cosmetics
in this form are already commercially available and successfully used, presenting a better
dose-effect ratio and provoking less side effects.
In the 1990s, transfersomes, i.e., lipid vesicles containing large fractions of fatty acids,
were introduced. Transfersomes (67–69) consist of a mixture of a lipidic agent with a
surfactant. In consequence, their bilayers are much more elastic than those of most liposomes.
Niosomes can be prepared from various classes of nonionic surfactants, e.g., polyglycerol
alkyl ethers (66,70), glucosyl dialkyl ethers (71), crown ethers, and polyoxyethylene alkyl
ethers and esters (72).
The ethosomes are soft phospholipid vesicles, whose size can be modulated from tens of
nanometers to microns. These vesicular systems have been found to be very efficient for
enhanced delivery of molecules with different physicochemical characteristics to/through the
skin. They can be modulated to permit enhancement into the skin strata as far as the deep
dermis or to facilitate transdermal delivery of lipophilic and hydrophilic molecules (73).
Transfersomes have been shown to be versatile carriers for the local and systemic
delivery of various steroids, proteins, and hydrophilic macromolecules (69). The mechanism
proposed by the author for transfersomes is that they are highly deformable, thus facilitating
their rapid penetration through the intercellular lipids of the stratum corneum. The osmotic
gradient, caused by the difference in water concentrations between the skin surface and skin
interior, has been proposed as the major driving force for transfersome penetration (68).
The effectiveness of vesicles has been investigated by several research groups.
Liposomes, in particular, have received a great deal of attention (74–77).
In several studies, the diffusion of a drug was facilitated or achieved certain selectivity
into human and nonhuman skin by vesicle encapsulation (85% of the papers). Other studies
show that the influence of vesicles on drug transport is negligible (10%). Only a few papers
claimed that the vesicles have no effect on the skin (5%).
OTHER ENCAPSULATION SYSTEMS
Cyclodextrins (CDs) are cyclic oligosaccharides containing at least 6 D–(+) glucopyranose units
attached by a-(1, 4) glucosidic bonds. The three natural CDs, a-, b-, and g-CDs (with 6, 7, or 8
glucose units, respectively) differ in their ring size and solubility.
CDs have been used to optimize local and systemic dermal drug delivery. Applications
of CDs in transdermal drug delivery include enhancement of drug release and/or permeation,
drug stabilization in formulation or at absorptive site, alleviation of drug-induced local
irritation, sustaining of drug release from vehicle, and alteration of drug bioconversion in the
viable skin (78).
CDs increase topical availability of drugs by solubilizing lipophilic drugs and thus
increasing availability of the drug at the skin surface. The drugs are therefore solubilized
without modifying their intrinsic property of lipophilicity. Polymers, such as hydroxypropyl
methylcellulose (HPMC), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), and carboxymethylcellulose sodium
(CMC), may be added to increase permeability. The type and amount of CDs are two
important parameters for maximizing the permeability of the drug in formulation. Finally, use
of other permeation enhancers has been seen to aid the CD-mediated delivery of drugs, such as
prostaglandin E1 through the skin (79).
Microemulsions are stable dispersions in the form of spherical droplets, whose diameter is in
the range of 10 to 100 nm. They are composed of oil, water, and usually surfactant and cosurfactant.
These systems show structural similarity to micelles and inverse micelles, resulting in
O/W or W/O microemulsions, respectively. They are highly dynamic systems showing
fluctuating surfaces caused by forming and deforming processes.
792
Jansen

=== Page 810 ===
The main characteristics of microemulsions are the low viscosity associated with a
Newtonian-type flow, a transparent or translucid appearance, isotropic, and thermodynamic
stability within a specific temperature setting. Certain microemulsions may thus be obtained
without heating, simply by mixing the components as long as they are in a liquid state.
One of the conditions for microemulsion formation is a very small, rather than a transient
negative, interfacial tension. This is rarely achieved by the use of a single surfactant, almost
always necessitating the addition of a cosurfactant. The presence of a short chain alcohol, e.g.,
can reduce the interfacial tension from about 10 mN/m to a value less than 10–2 mN/m.
Exceptions to this rule are provided by nonionic surfactants which, at their phase inversion
temperature, also exhibit very low interfacial tensions.
Since microemulsions were discovered approximately six decades ago, their applications
in several fields, including cosmetics, have been increased because of their good appearance,
thermodynamic stability, high solubilization power, and ease of preparation (80).
Liquid crystals are defined as the intermediary state between solid and liquid and also
called mesomorphous or crystalline phase, presenting characteristics of the mentioned physical
states. That intermediary phase, in simple emulsions, can act as forms of encapsulation of drugs
providing its controlled liberation and can increase cutaneous hydration. These characteristics
evidence the differentiation of the developed formulations and the use of the same ones in the
release of new cosmetic vehicles (81).
Multiple emulsions are emulsions in which the dispersion phase contains another
dispersion phase. Thus, water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) emulsion is a system in which the
globules of water are dispersed in globules of oil, and the oil globules are themselves dispersed
in an aqueous environment. A parallel arrangement exists in oil-in-water-in-oil (O/W/O) type.
The first commercial use of a W/O/W-type multiple emulsion is unique moisturizing by
Lancaster, which was introduced on the market in 1991.
Cosmetic applications of multiple emulsions have been protected in the patents issued
for their composition. The patents show that multiple emulsions are highly recommended for
all kinds of cosmetic applications: sunscreens, makeup removers, cleansers, and nutritive,
hydrating, and cooling products.
Ferreira (82,83) showed three emulsions types (W/O/W, O/W, and W/O) containing a
water-soluble molecule (glucose). The release of glucose from the O/W emulsion was the fastest.
From the W/O emulsion, it was the slowest, while the one from the W/O/W emulsion was
intermediate. The W/O/W emulsion showed some tendency toward steady state during the first
3 to 12 hours, and the flux was found to be 1.7 times greater than that from the W/O emulsion.
CONCLUSION
Encapsulation is now part of our everyday life and should be used to improve our life.
However, much care needs to be taken to decipher completely and exhaustively the effects of
nanomaterials before they may be commercialized.
Molecular biology has provided us with tools to identify and build genetic materials that
can be used for treatment of hereditary diseases. Developing a carrier for gene therapy is one
of the main challenges that the encapsulation field faces today.
What will the future bring us? We have already indicated where, on the basis of our
present knowledge, encapsulation in many different vectors offer a rational advantage as
active carrier systems to the skin. Therefore, efforts should be made to obtain a better
understanding concerning the mechanisms of these systems at the molecular and supra-
molecular level. This could lead to new formulation processes and open new prospects in the
area of active delivery by means of encapsulated systems.
REFERENCES
1. Couvreur P, Barrat G, Fattal E, et al. Nanocapsule technology: a review. Crit Rev Ther Drug Carrier
Syst 2002; 19:99–134.
2. Mu¨ller RH, Radtkeb M, Wissing SA. Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN) and nanostructured lipid carriers
(NLC) in cosmetic and dermatological preparations. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002; 54(suppl 1):S131–S155.
Encapsulation to Deliver Topical Actives
793

=== Page 811 ===
3. Vauthier C, Dubernet C, Fattal E, et al. Poly(alkylcyanoacrylates) as biodegradable materials for
biomedical applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2003; 55(4):519–548.
4. Champion JA, Katare YK, Mitragotri S. Particle shape: a new design parameter for micro- and
nanoscale drug delivery carriers. J Control Release 2007; 121(1–2):3–9.
5. Dutta RC. Drug carriers in pharmaceutical design: promises and progress. Curr Pharm Des 2007; 13(7):
761–769.
6. Guterres SS, Alves MP, Pohlmann A. Polymeric nanoparticles, nanospheres and nanocapsules, for
cutaneous applications. Drug Targ Insights 2007; 2:147–157.
7. Lehn JM. Toward self-organization and complex matter. Science 2002; 295:2400–2403.
8. Bouchemal K, Brianon S, Perrier E, et al. Synthesis and characterization of polyurethane and poly
(ether urethane) nanocapsules using a new technique of interfacial polycondensation combined to
spontaneous emulsification. Int J Pharm 2004; 269(1):89–100.
9. Donaldson K, Stone V, Tran CL, et al. Nanotoxicology. Occup Environ Med 2004; 61:727–728.
10. Oberdorster G, Oberdorster E, Oberdorster J. Nanotoxicology: an emerging discipline evolving from
studies of ultrafine particles. Environ Health Perspect 2005; 113:823–839.
11. Deasy P. Microencapsulation and Related Drug Processes. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1984.
12. Kondo A. Microcapsule Processing and Technology. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1979.
13. Thies C. A survey of microencapsulation processes. In: Benita S, ed. Microencapsulation, Methods
and Industrial Applications. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1996:1–9.
14. Jacobs IC, Mason NS. Polymeric delivery systems. In: Elnolkaly MA, Piatt DM, Charpentier BA, eds.
ACS Symposium Series 520, American Chemical Society. 1993: 1–17
15. Rolland A, Wagner N, Chatelus A, et al. Site-specific drug delivery to pilosebaceous structures using
polymeric microspheres. Pharm Res 1993; 10(12):1738–1744.
16. Lademann J, Schaefer H, Otberg N, et al. Penetration of microparticles into human skin. Hautarzt
2004; 55(12):1117–1119.
17. Wester RC, Rajesh P, Nacht S, et al. Controlled release of benzoyl peroxide from a porous microsphere
polymeric system can reduce topical irritancy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991; 24(5):720–726.
18. Jelvehgari M, Siahi-Shadbad MR, Azarmi S, et al. The microsponge delivery system of benzoyl
peroxide: preparation, characterization and release studies. Int J Pharm 2006; 308(1–2):124–132.
19. Santoyo S, Ga de Jalo´n E, Ygartua P, et al. Optimization of topical cidofovir penetration using
microparticles. Int J Pharm 2002; 242(1–2):107–113.
20. Scalia S, Mezzena M, Iannuccelli V. Influence of solid lipid microparticle carriers on skin
penetration of the sunscreen agent, 4-methylbenzylidene camphor. J Pharm Pharmacol 2007; 59(12):
1621–1627.
21. Iannuccelli V, Coppi G, Sergi S, et al. In vivo and in vitro skin permeation of butyl
methoxydibenzoylmethane from lipospheres. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2007; 21(1):30–38.
22. Kreuter J. Nanoparticles—Preparation and applications. In: Donbrow Med. Microcapsules and
Nanoparticles in Medicine and Pharmacy. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 1992:125–148.
23. Couvreur P, Coarraze G, Devissaguet JP, et al. Nanoparticles: preparation and characterization. In:
Benita S, ed. Microencapsulation, Methods and Industrial Applications. New York: Marcel Dekker,
1996:183–211.
24. Villalobos-Herna´ndez JR, Mu¨ller-Goymann CC. Artificial sun protection: sunscreens and their carrier
systems. Curr Drug Deliv 2006; 3(4):405–415.
25. Parekh HS. The advance of dendrimers-a versatile targeting platform for gene/drug delivery. Curr
Pharm Des 2007; 13(27):2837–2850.
26. Mu¨ller RH. Particulate systems for the controlled delivery of active compounds in pharmaceutics and
cosmetics. In: Diederichs JE, Mu¨ller RH, eds. Future Strategies for Drug Delivery with Particulate
Systems. Stuttgart: CRC Press, 1998:73–90.
27. Mu¨ller RH, Mehnert W, Dingler A, et al. Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNTM, LipopearlsTM). Proceed
Int’l Symp Cont Rel Bioact Mater, 24. 1997; 923–924.
28. Shim J, Seok Kang H, Park WS, et al. Transdermal delivery of mixnoxidil with block copolymer
nanoparticles. J Control Release 2004; 97(3):477–484.
29. Lombardi Borgia S, Regehly M, Sivaramakrishnan R, et al. Lipid nanoparticles for skin penetration
enhancement: correlation to drug localization within the particle matrix as determined by
fluorescence and parelectric spectroscopy. J Control Release 2005; 110(1):151–163.
30. Lboutounne H, Guillaume YC, Michel L, et al. Study and development of encapsulated forms of 4, 5,
8-trimethylpsoralen for topical drug delivery. Drug Dev Res 2004; 61(2):86–94.
31. Luppi B, Cerchiara T, Bigucci F, et al. Polymeric nanoparticles composed of fatty acids and
polyvinylalcohol for topical application of sunscreens. J Pharm Pharmacol 2004; 56(3):407–411.
32. Santos Maia C, Mehnert W, Schaller M, et al. Drug targeting by solid lipid nanoparticles for dermal
use. J Drug Target 2002; 10(6):489–495.
33. Gupta M, Gupta AK. In vitro cytotoxicity studies of hydrogel pullulan nanoparticles prepared by
AOT/N-hexane micellar system. J Pharm Pharm Sci 2004; 7(1):38–46.
794
Jansen

=== Page 812 ===
34. Wissing SA, Mu¨ller RH. Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN)-a novel carrier for UV blockers. Pharmazie
2001; 56(10):783–786.
35. Wissing SA, Mu¨ller RH. Solid lipid nanoparticles as carrier for sunscreens: in vitro release and in vivo
skin penetration. J Control Release 2002; 81(3):225–233.
36. Wissing S, Mu¨ller R. The influence of the crystallinity of lipid nanoparticles on their occlusive
properties. Int J Pharm 2002; 242(1–2):377–379.
37. Nohynek GJ, Lademann J, Ribaud C, et al. Grey good on the skin? Nanotechnology, cosmetic and
sunscreen safety. Crit Rev Toxicol 2007; 37(3):251–277.
38. Bianco A. Carbon nanotubes for the delivery of therapeutic molecules. Expert Opin Drug Deliv
2004; 1(1):57–65.
39. Sayes CM, Gobin AM, Ausman KD, et al. Nano-C60 cytotoxicity is due to lipid peroxidation.
Biomaterials 2005; 26(36):7587–7595.
40. Oberdorster E. Manufactured nanomaterials (fullerenes, C60) induce oxidative stress in the brain of
juvenile largemouth bass. Environ Hlth Perspect 2004; 112(10): 1058–1062.
41. Zhu S, Oberdorster E, Haasch ML. Toxicity of an engineered nanoparticle (fullerene C60) in two
aquatic species. Environ Res 2006; 62(suppl):S5–S9.
42. Jain NK, Asthana A. Dendritic systems in drug delivery applications. Expert Opin Drug Deliv 2007;
4(5):495–512.
43. Cheng Y, Wang J, Rao T, et al. Pharmaceutical applications of dendrimers: promising nanocarriers for
drug delivery. Front Biosci 2008; 13:1447–1471.
44. Cui Z, Mumper RJ. Chitosan-based nanoparticles for topical genetic immunization. J Control Release
2001; 75(3):409–419.
45. Cui Z, Mumper RJ. Topical immunization using nanoengineered genetic vaccines. J Control Release
2002; 81(1–2):173–184.
46. Yu W, Tabosa do Egito ES, Barrat G, et al. A novel approach to the preparation of injectable emulsions
by a spontaneous emulsification process. Int J Pharm 1993; 89:139–146.
47. Tadros T, Izquierdo P, Esquena J, et al. Formation and stability of nano-emulsions. Adv Colloid
Interface Sci 2004; 108–109:303–318.
48. Hansrani PK, Davis SS, Groves MJ. The preparation and properties of sterile intravenous emulsions.
J Parenter Sci Technol 1983; 37:145–150.
49. Yalabik-Kas HS, Erylmaz S, Hincal AA. Formation, stability and toxicity studies of intravenous fat
emulsions. STP Pharm 1985; 1:12–19.
50. Washington C, Davis SS. The production of parenteral feeding emulsions by microfluidizer. Int J
Pharm 1988; 169–176.
51. Lidgate DM, Fu RC, Fleitman JS. Using a microfluidizer to manufature parenteral emulsions. Pharm
Technol 1990; 14:30–33.
52. Kreilgaard M, Pedersen EJ, Jaroszewski JW. NMR characterization and transdermal drug delivery
potentials of microemulsion systems. J Control Rel 2000; 69:421–433.
53. Alvarez-Figueroa MJ. Blanco-mendez.transdermal delivery of methotrexate: iontophoretic delivery
from hydrogels and passive delivery from microemulsions. Int J Pharm 2001; 215:57–65.
54. RheeYS, Choi JG, Park ES, et al. Transdermal delivery of ketoprofen using microemulsions. Int J
Pharm 2001; 228:161–170.
55. Lee PJ, Langer R, Shastri VP. Novel microemulsion enhancer formulation for simultaneous transdermal
delivery of hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs. Pharm Res 2003; 20:264–269.
56. Kreilgaard M. Dermal pharmacokinetics of microemulsion formulations determined by in-vitro
microdialysis. Pharm Res 2001; 18:367–373.
57. Kreilgaard M, Kemme MJB, Burggraaf J, et al. Influence of a microemulsion vehicle on cutaneous
bioequivalence of a lipophilic model drug assessed by microdialysis and pharmacodynamics. Pharm
Res 2001; 18:593–599.
58. Haake HM, Lagren A˜ H, Brands A, et al. Determination of the substantivity of emollients to human
hair. J Cosmet Sci 2007; 58(4):443–450.
59. Olivera-Martinez BI, Ca´zares-Delgadillo J, Calderilla-Fajardo SB, et al. Preparation of polymeric
nanocapsules containing octyl methoxycinnamate by the emulsification-diffusion technique: pene-
tration across the stratum corneum. J Pharm Sci 2005; 94(7):1552–1559.
60. Calderilla-Fajardo SB, Ca´zares-Delgadillo J, Villalobos-Garcia R, et al. Influence of sucrose esters on
the in vivo percutaneous penetration of octylmethoxycinnamate formulated in nanocapsules,
nanoemulsion, and emulsion. Drug Dev Ind Pharm 2006; 32(1):107–113.
61. Wu H, Ramachandran C, Bielinska AU, et al. Topical transfection using plasmid DNA in a water-in-
oil nanoemulsion. Int J Pharm 2001; 221(1–2):23–34.
62. Wu H, Ramachandran C, Weiner ND, et al. Topical transport of hydrophilic compounds using water-
in-oil nanoemulsions. Int J Pharm 2001; 220(1–2):63–75.
63. Bangham AD, Standish MM, Watkins JC. Diffusion of univalent ions across the lamellae of swollen
phospholipids. J Mol Biol 1965; 13:238–252.
Encapsulation to Deliver Topical Actives
795

=== Page 813 ===
64. Gebicki JM, Hicks M. Preparation and properties of vesicle enclosed by fatty acid membranes. Chem
Phys Lipids 1975; 16:142–160.
65. Mezei M, Gulasekharam V. Liposomes—a selective drug delivery system for the topical route of
administration. Life Sci 1980; 26:1473–1477
66. Handjani-Vila RM, Ribier A, Rondot B, et al. Dispersions of lamellar phases of non-ionic lipids in
cosmetic products. Int J Cosmet Sci 1979; 1:303–314.
67. Planas ME, Gonzalez P, Rodriguez L. Non invasive percutaneous induction of topical analgesia by a
new type of drug carriers and prolongation of the local pain-insensitivity by analgesic liposomes.
Anesth Analg 1992; 95:614–621.
68. Cevc G, Blume G. Lipid vesicles penetrate into the skin owing to the transdermal osmotic gradients
and hydration force. Bioch Biophys Acta 1992; 1104:226–232.
69. Cevc G, Gebauer D, Stieber J, et al. Ultraflexible vesicles, transfersomes, have an extremely low pore
penetration resistance and transport therapeutic amounts of insulin across the intact mammalian skin.
Bioch Biophys Acta 1998; 1368:201–215.
70. Baillie AJ, Florence AT, Hume LR, et al. The preparation and properties of niosome non-ionic
surfactant vesicles. J Pharm Pharmacol 1985; 37:863–868.
71. Van Hal DA, Bowstra JA, Junginger HE. Preparation and characterization of new dermal dosage form
for antipsoriatic drug, dithranol, based on non ionic surfactant vesicles. Eur J Pharm Biopharm 1992;
38:47s.
72. Hofland HEJ, Bowstra JA, Ponec M, et al. Interactions of non-ionic surfactant vesicles with cultured
keratinocytes and human skin in vitro. J Contr Rel 1991; 16:155–168.
73. Touitou E, Dayan N, Bergelson L, et al. Ethosomes—novel vesicular carriers for enhanced delivery:
characterization and skin penetration properties. J Control Release 2000; 65(3):403–418.
74. Bowstra JA, Junginger HE. Non-ionic surfactant vesicles (niosomes) for oral and transdermal
administration of drugs. In: Puisieux F, Couvreur P, Dellatre J, Devissaguet JP, eds. Liposomes, New
Systems and New Trends in their Applications. 1995: 101–121.
75. Posner R. Liposomes. J Drugs Dermatol 2002; 1(2):161–164.
76. Redziniak G. Liposomes and skin: past, present, future. Pathol Biol (Paris) 2003; 51(5):279–281.
77. El Maghraby GM, Williams AC, Barry BW. Can drug-bearing liposomes penetrate intact skin?
J Pharm Pharmacol 2006; 58(4):415–429.
78. Matsuda H, Arima H. Cyclodextrins in transdermal and rectal delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 1999;
36:81–99.
79. Uekama K, Adachi H, Irie T, et al. Improved transdermal delivery of prostaglandin E1 though hairless
mouse skin: combined use of carboxymethyl-ethyl-b-cyclodextrin and permeation enhancers. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1992; 44:119–121.
80. Boonme P. Applications of microemulsions in cosmetics. J Cosmet Dermatol 2007; 6(4):223–228.
81. Massaro RC, Zabagli MS, Souza CR, et al. O/w dispersions development containing liquid crystals.
Boll Chim Farm 2003; 142(7):264–270.
82. Ferreira LAM, Doucet J, Seiller M, et al. In vitro percutaneous absorption of metronidazole and
glucose: comparison of o/w, w/o/w and o/w systems. Int J Pharm 1995; 121:169–179.
83. Ferreira LAM, Seiller M, Grossiord JL, et al. Vehicle influence on in vitro release of glucose: w/o,
w/o/w and o/w systems compared. J Cont Rel 1995; 33:349–356.
796
Jansen

=== Page 814 ===
73
Elastic Vesicles as Topical/Transdermal
Drug Delivery Systems
Myeong Jun Choi
Korea Clinical Research Center Co., Ltd., Gyeonggi-do, Korea
Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
The topical/transdermal (TT) delivery route for drug administration has many advantages
over other pathways, including avoiding the hepatic first-pass effect, continuous drug
delivery, fewer side effects, and improved patient compliance (1). A major obstacle to TT drug
delivery is the low penetration of drugs through skin. The stratum corneum (SC) provides a
principal barrier to TT delivery of applied drugs and consists of corneocytes that are
embedded in an intercellular lipid matrix composed of ceramides, free fatty acids, and
cholesterol (CHOL) (2). Several approaches have been used to weaken this skin barrier and to
improve TT drug delivery (3–8).
One possibility for increasing the penetration of drugs is the use of vesicular systems
such as liposomes. Because of their biocompatibility and capability of incorporating both
hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs, liposomes have been investigated as parenteral drug and
antigen-carrier systems and more recently as TT drug delivery systems (9–18). Despite
improvements in TT delivery, conventional liposomes were not efficient at delivering
transdermally across the skin because they do not deeply penetrate the skin, but rather remain
confined to the upper layer of the SC. Thus, several investigators developed novel elastic
vesicles to deeply and easily penetrate across the skin (19–21).
In the early 1990s, novel series of liquid-state vesicles have been developed, and these
vesicles could better facilitate drug transport across the skin as compared with conventional
vesicles. Novel types of vesicular systems have been recorded to penetrate intact skin if
applied nonocclusively in vivo by virtue of their very high and self-optimizing deformability.
Elastic vesicles are classified with phospholipid and detergent-based types (Table 1). Because
of high flexibility, elastic vesicles squeeze through small pores in SC less than the vesicle sizes.
Elastic vesicles were more efficient at delivering a low- and high-molecular-weight drug to the
skin in terms of quantity and depth (24–26,33–38). The precise quantity and depth of elastic
vesicles’ penetration through skin depends on the carrier type, the total mass applied, the
entrapment efficiency, and the detailed application conditions such as occlusion, pretreatment
of vesicles, duration, and application volume. Elastic vesicles prolonged the release and
showed better biological activity in comparison with conventional liposomes and ointments.
This review focuses on the effect of elastic vesicles for enhancing the penetration
chemicals, and it defines action mechanism and optimal condition of elastic vesicles.
ELASTIC VESICLES–SKIN INTERACTION
Vesicle–skin interactions can occur either at the skin surface or in the deeper layers of the SC.
Hofland et al. (39) and Abraham and Downing (40) have shown fusion and adsorption of
vesicles onto the SC surface, forming stacks of lamellae and irregular structures on top of the
skin. Vesicle–skin interactions are strongly influenced by the composition of the vesicles,
resulting in differences in their phase, state, and elasticity. Liquid-state vesicles have been
shown to have superior to gel-state vesicles (41). When comparing the interactions of elastic
and rigid vesicles with hairless mouse skin in vivo, only the elastic liquid-state vesicles affected
the ultrastructure of the viable tissue. No changes in the ultrastructure were observed with any
of the conventional liposomes (42).

=== Page 815 ===
Cevc and Blume (19) suggested that elastic vesicles (Transfersomes) were able to
penetrate through intact SC under the influence of a transepidermal osmotic gradient.
Although the transport of most compounds is increased during occlusive application, Cevc
and Blume (19) have suggested that elastic vesicles (Transfersomes) are most efficient under
nonocclusive conditions. Nonocclusive conditions are necessary to create a transepidermal
osmotic gradient, which is believed to be the driving force for elastic transport into the skin.
The osmotic gradient is caused by the difference in water concentrations between the skin
surface and skin interior. Transfersomes are highly deformable, and this property facilitates
their rapid penetration through the intercellular lipid pathway of the SC. Schatzlein and Cevc
(43) reported the existence of irregularities within the intercellular lipid packing of murine SC
that can act as virtual channels through which Transfersomes could penetrate.
In the case of detergent-based elastic vesicles, Van den Bergh et al. (42,44) investigated
the interaction of elastic and rigid vesicles with murine skin in vivo and with human skin in
vitro. Unlike Transfersomes, these studies did not show any evidence that elastic vesicles could
penetrate through the SC. However, Honeywell-Nguyen et al. (45) demonstrated a fast
penetration of intact elastic vesicles into human SC, and these vesicles were localized within
channel-like regions. They also investigated the in vivo interaction of elastic vesicles with
human skin, using the tape-stripping technique in combination with freeze–fracture electron
microscopy, and demonstrated a fast penetration of intact elastic vesicles into human SC (46).
They proposed that the channel-like regions represent imperfections within the intercellular
lipid lamellae in the areas with highly undulating cornified envelopes. Taken together, intact
elastic vesicles may penetrate into human SC via channel-like regions.
Ethosomes are also phospholipid elastic vesicles having a high content of ethanol.
Ethanol interacts with lipid molecules in the polar head group region, resulting in a reduction
in the melting point of SC lipid, increasing their fluidity. The interaction of ethanol into the
polar head group environment can result in an increase in membrane permeability. This is
followed by a fusion of ethosomes with cell membranes. In addition to the effects of ethanol on
SC structure, ethosome itself interacts with the SC barrier and then can penetrate the disturbed
SC bilayer (47,48).
Table 1
Drug Skin Penetration from Phospholipid- and Detergent-Based Elastic Vesicles
Drug (comments)
Animal
Composition
Enhancing factor
Reference
Dipotassium
Pig
PC:KG (4:1)
5.9
22
Glycyrrhizinate (KG)
HPC:KG (4:1)
5.5
Methotrexate
Pig
PC:KG (2:1)
5.2
23
HPC:KG (2:1)
5.9
Dexamethasone
Rat
PC:CHOL (7:3)
1.0
24
PC:deoxycholate (85:15)
2.2
PC:Tween-80 (85:15)
1.9
PC:Span-80 (85:15)
2.3
Diclofenac
Rat
Commercial form
1.0
25
Lotion-like transfersomes
30–100
Gap junction protein
(Antibody production)
Mouse
Soybean PC
PC/sodium cholate/SDS
1.0
4.7
26
Insulin (decrease of
blood glucose)
Mouse
PC liposomes or micelle
PC/cholate (8.7:1.3)
No change
20–30%
27
Cyclosporin A
Mouse
PC/cholate (10:2.8)
16.2
28
Estradiol
Human
PC/cholate (84:16)
18
29.30
PC/Span 80 (84:16)
16
PC/Tween 80 (84:16)
15
PC/oleic acid (84:16)
13
5-Fluorouracil
Human
PC/cholate (84:16)
6.9–13.2
31
Rotigotine
Human
L-595/PEG-8-L (50:50)
30.6
32
Pergolide
Human
L-595/PEG-8-L (50:50)
2.7
33
Abbreviations: PC, phosphatidylcholine; KG, dipotassium glycyrrhizinate; HPC, hydrogenated lecithin; CHOL,
cholesterol; SDS, sodium dodecyl sulfate.
Source: From Refs. 22–33.
798
Choi and Maibach

=== Page 816 ===
TRANSFERSOMES
Skin has small virtual pores (20–40 nm), and this limits passing through intercellular
passages in the outer skin layers (20,49). To overcome this problem, Cevc developed a new
liposomal system with more deformable aggregates called Transfersomes (20). Trans-
fersomes differ from more conventional liposomes in several respects. Transfersomes
resemble liposomes in morphology, but not in function (50). The most important is the
extremely high and stress-dependent adaptability of such mixed lipid aggregates. Because of
high deformability, Transfersomes squeeze through pores in SC that are less than one-tenth
in the liposomes’s diameter. Thus, sizes up to 200 to 300 nm can penetrate intact skin (27).
Transfersomes contain phosphatidylcholine (PC) and a surfactant (edge activator) and also
consist of at least one inner aqueous compartment surrounded by a lipid bilayer. Sodium
cholate, Span 80, Tween 80, oleic acid, and dipotassium glycyrrhizinate (KG) (20,22,29,30)
were employed as edge activators. For transdermal DNA delivery, DOTAP (positive-charged
molecule), as a component, was used in producing Transfersomes instead of PC (38).
Subsequent studies have documented that Transfersomes were more effective than
conventional liposomes or ointment in the enhancement of small and large drug molecules
across mouse and human skin (24–26,28,31,35–38).
Several investigators reported that Transfersomes prolonged the release and improved
the biological activity in vivo (24,25,35,51). The in vivo performance of Transfersomes was
studied by a carrageenan– and arachidonic acid–induced edema model with dexamethasone
and triamcinolone acetonide (TRMA). Jain et al. (24) showed that dexamethasone Trans-
fersomes could provide a maximum of 82.32% inhibition of paw edema, whereas conventional
liposomes and ointments prevented approximately 38.32% and 25.35% of paw edema,
respectively. With TRMA, the drug dose of 0.2 mg cm–2 suppressed 75% inhibition of ear
edema for 48 hours. In contrast, a conventional formulation of TRMA required a 10-fold higher
drug dosage to achieve a similar effect (35). A similar result was obtained with hydrocortisone
and diclofenac Transfersomes (25,35,51). Diclofenac association with Transfersomes prolonged
the effect and reached 10-fold higher concentrations in the tissue under the skin in comparison
with the drug from a commercial hydrogel (25).
In addition to chemical drugs, Transfersomes could deliver large molecules into the body
through intact skin. Paul et al. (26) investigated the effect of Transfersomes on the transdermal
immunization with protein antigen. They applied Transfersomes to the intact skin surface with
gap junction proteins (GJP) and showed that the specific antibody titers were higher than those
elicited by subcutaneous injection of GJP in Transfersomes, mixed micelles, or conventional
liposomes. Hofer et al. (37) reported the formulation of IL-2 and IFN-a containing
Transfersomes for transdermal application. They showed that IL-2 as well as IFN-a were
trapped by Transfersomes (75–80%) in biologically active form and in sufficient concentration
for immunotherapy. Cevc (36) also reported the transdermal delivery of insulin with
Transfersomes. Transfersomes could deliver insulin through skin barrier with a reproducible
drug effect that resembled closely to that of insulin injected under the skin. In addition, Kim et
al. (38) investigated the effect of Transfersomes (DOTAP and cholate) on the transdermal
application of DNA in mice-intact skin. They reported that the GFP expression was detected in
some organs, such as liver and lungs, when green fluorescent protein (GFP) was complexed
with Transfersomes, whereas the GFP mixed only with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) did
not observe with GFP expression. Transfersomes were capable of penetrating DNA into intact
skin of mice when topically applied. Thus, Transfersomes may be developed further as a
noninvasive protein and gene delivery system.
Transfersomes have several advantages on the TT drug delivery. They can be entrapped
and delivered with small and large molecules through TT delivery. When applied on the intact
skin, Transfersomes are not detrimental to the skin. Phospholipid, as a component of
Transfersomes, even seems to improve the hydration of the aged skin (25). The advantages
include a faster onset of drug effect, longer times of action, a biological action that is unaffected
by mechanical abrasion, and the ability to reduce the necessary dosage needed to achieve
therapeutic effects. Thus, the use of Transfersomes on the skin offers unprecedented
opportunities for well-controlled and modern topical medication, not only just for low-
molecular weight, but also for a variety of macromolecular therapeutics.
Elastic Vesicles as Topical/Transdermal Drug Delivery Systems
799

=== Page 817 ===
EFFECT OF TYPE SURFACTANTS AND CONCENTRATION
To prepare Transfersomes vesicles, edge activators (surfactants) were incorporated into the
vesicular membranes; sodium cholate or sodium deoxycholate, Span 80, and Tween 80 have
been used for this purpose. El Mghraby et al. (29,30) investigated the effect of surfactants on the
formation of Transfersomes and permeation into the skin using cholate, Span 80, Tween 80, and
oleic acid. Also, they investigated the effect of surfactant concentration on the skin permeation.
Transfersomes significantly improved the epidermal delivery of estradiol compared with
the aqueous solution. The maximum flux increased by 18-, 16-, 15-, and 13-fold for Transfersomes
containing sodium cholate, Span 80, Tween 80, and oleic acid compared with control. The skin
deposition also increased by eight-, seven-, and eight-fold for cholate, Span 80, and Tween 80,
respectively, compared with control. The efficiencies of Span 80 and Tween 80 were comparable
with that of sodium cholate, but efficiency of oleic acid was less than that of sodium cholate. With
dexamethasone Transfersomes, Span 80 was more effective as compared with sodium
deoxycholate and Tween 80 as edge activators on penetration and edema inhibition assay.
With respect to drug delivery from vesicles, Jmax first increased with increasing
surfactant concentration, then decreased. These results suggested that too low or too high
concentrations of surfactants are not beneficial in vesicular delivery of estradiol through skin
and also indicated that the possible penetration enhancing effect of surfactants is not mainly
responsible for improved estradiol skin delivery from deformable vesicles. The surfactant
concentrations in the refined formulation were assessed to be 14.0%, 13.3%, and 15.5% w/w for
sodium cholate, Span 80, and Tween 80, respectively (29). A possible explanation for lower
drug delivery at high surfactant concentrations may be that surfactant at high concentrations
decreased the entrapment efficiency and disrupted the lipid membrane so that it became more
permeable to the entrapped drug. This will in turn reduce the delivery. The overall results
suggested that there may be an optimum concentration of surfactant in lipid vesicles for
maximum skin delivery of drug using Transfersome vesicles.
In addition, KG is used in preparing elastic vesicles. KG has emulsifying properties and
good solubility. Thus, it is widely used in cosmetics. Trotta et al. (22) evaluated the ability of
KG to produce elastic vesicles with soya lecithin (PC) or hydrogenated lecithin (HPC). They
compared KG permeation with elastic vesicles and aqueous solution in the pigskin. All
systems showed a negligible flux, but differed in the residual amount of KG in the skin. PC and
HPC elastic vesicles promote the transfer of KG into the pigskin (60  8 to 71  10 mg cm–2),
while the KG solution failed to achieve transport (12  3 mg cm–2). There were no significant
differences between elastic vesicles containing PC or HPC. The skin deposition increased by
fivefold compared with 0.25% KG control solution.
Trotta et al. (23) also reported the effect of KG elastic vesicles on the dermal penetration
of methotrexate (MTX) in pigskin. In an estimation of the cumulative amount of MTX
permeated after 24 hours through pigskin, aqueous solution and conventional liposomes are
quite similar in terms of MTX delivery through skin, whereas elastic vesicles show an increase
in the amount of MTX permeated. In a skin deposition after 24-hour application, PC and HPC
elastic vesicles promoted the transfer of MTX into pigskin. Skin deposition increased by a
factor of 3 compared with either aqueous solution or conventional liposomes. Thus, KG acts as
a good edge activator to produce elastic vesicles for TT drug delivery.
Which detergents are the best choices in Transfersomes formulation? The effect of
detergents was different from other formulation conditions. The use of cholate seems to be better
than other detergents in the case of skin delivery of large molecules. In addition to cholate, KG is
a good candidate. KG has chemical stability, good solubility, emulsifying property, and anti-
inflammatory activity. Thus, the use of elastic vesicles containing KG creates new opportunities
for the well-controlled and modern topical medication. However, a more extensive study about
compositions should be undertaken to define the optimal formulation regardless of drug types.
NONPHOSPHOLIPID-BASED ELASTIC VESICLES
In addition to phospholipid-based elastic vesicles (Transfersomes and ethosomes), Van den
Bergh et al. (21) developed a series of elastic vesicles, consisting of the bilayer-forming
surfactant L595 (sucrose laurate ester) and the micelle-forming surfactant PEG-8-L
800
Choi and Maibach

=== Page 818 ===
(octaoxyethylene laurate ester). L595 consisted of 100% sucrose laurate ester (30% monoester,
40% diester, and 30% triester). Surfactant-based elastic vesicles consisted of L595, PEG-8-L, and
sulfosuccinate as stabilizers in the molar ratio 50:50:5. Several investigators reported that L595–
PEG-8-L elastic vesicles were effective in enhancing the skin permeation of various drugs
(32,33,52,53). However, drug transport was influenced by fluidity of elastic vesicles. The most
rigid vesicles consisting of L595/PEG-8-L (100:0) significantly reduced the flux by 50%
compared with the buffer control (p < 0.05). However, increasing the PEG-8-L content—and
thereby increasing the vesicle elasticity—resulted in a significant higher flux for the L595/
PEG-8-L (70/30 or 50/50) elastic vesicles (p < 0.01). This was a threefold increase to the buffer
treatment and a sixfold increase to the most rigid vesicle treatment (33). Similar results were
obtained from rotigotine elastic vesicles (32).
Elastic vesicle transport and the appearance of vesicle material in human SC can be
affected by several factors, including pH, entrapping efficiency, pretreatment of vesicles,
occlusive volume, and duration of application (32,45,46). The optimal pH differs depending on
the drugs. The optimal pH was found to be 5.0 in case of pergolide, giving the highest drug
incorporation as well as the highest drug transport. There was more than a fourfold difference
between the highest flux at pH 5.0 (371.0  51.7 ng cm–2) and the lowest flux at pH 7.0 (89.3 
9.1 ng cm–2) (33). Unlike pergolide, optimal pH was found to be 9.0, giving the highest drug
incorporation (99.8%  0.02%), in case of rotigotine elastic vesicles. At pH 5.0, the entrapment
efficiency is very low (22.1%  9.6%). The flux and cumulative amount of vesicle solution at
pH 9.0 with high drug entrapment efficiency was 2.7-fold higher than those resulting from the
vesicle solution at pH 5.0. Vesicles solution at pH 9.0 (3251  902 ng cm–2) gave rise to
enhancement effect of factor 80 as compared with the corresponding buffer solution (42 
29 ng cm–2). In contrast, vesicles solution at pH 5.0 (1072  160 ng cm–2) did not significantly
enhance the drug transport as compared with its corresponding buffer control (1133  241 ng
cm–2) (32). Table 2 summarizes the effect of elastic vesicles on pergolide and rotigotine delivery
into the skin. As shown in Table 2, enhancement of rotigotine was much higher than that of
pergolide. Entrapment efficiency and drug properties may result in this difference.
Nonocclusive co-treatment with elastic vesicles improved the skin delivery of pergolide
compared with nonocclusive buffer control by more than twofold. Occlusion improved drug
transport from both elastic vesicles as well as buffer solutions because of the fact that water is
an excellent penetration enhancer for pergolide (45). In contrast to nonocclusive application,
occlusive treatment with elastic vesicles showed a lower flux compared with occlusive
treatment with the buffer control. A higher volume of application could increase the
partitioning of vesicles into the skin, thereby increasing the enhancement effect. Pergolide
transport from the 40- and 100-mL application were much higher within the first 20 hours as
compared with that from the 20-mL application. However, there were no significant
differences in the total cumulative amounts of drugs transported (306  47.4, 462.0  112.0,
and 509.7  141.9 in 20, 40, and 100 mL application, respectively) (45). They also investigated
the effect of co-application and pretreatment on the rotigotine transport. Co-application
(3483  1067 ng cm–2) significantly enhanced the drug transport by many folds, whereas
pretreatment (126  18 ng cm–2) clearly had no effect on the drug transport as compared with
buffer control (133  27 ng cm–2) (32). Similar result was obtained from pergolide elastic
vesicles.
Table 2
Comparison of Pergolide and Rotigotine Skin Delivery with Elastic Vesicles
Factors
Rotigotine
Pergolide
Use
Dopamine agonist
Dopamine agonist
Compositions
L595/PEG-8-L-sulfosuccinate
L595/PEG-8-L-sulfosuccinate
(50/50/5)
(50/50/5)
Enhancement ratio
30.6-fold
2.7-fold
Occlusion
Increase penetration
Optimal pH
9.0
5.0
Entrapment
99.8%  0.02% at pH 9.0
2.5 mg/mL at pH 5.0 (Saturated)
Average size
117  6 nm
100  5 nm
Pka
7.9
5–6
Lipophilicity
Lipophilic at pH 9.0
Lipophilic and positive charge
Elastic Vesicles as Topical/Transdermal Drug Delivery Systems
801

=== Page 819 ===
From these results, detergent-based elastic vesicles were found to be powerful drug
delivery systems across the skin. Co-application (co-treatment) and entrapment efficiency were
essential factors for an optimal drug delivery by elastic vesicle formulations. The drug
entrapment efficiency is strongly dependent on the pH of the drug–vesicular system. Thus, pH
was also an important factor to deliver drugs with TT pathway.
ETHOSOMES
Ethosomes are phospholipid liposome carriers containing high content of ethanol (20–45%)
(34). However, due to the interdigitation effect of ethanol on lipid bilayers, it was believed that
high concentrations of ethanol are detrimental to liposomal formulation. Touitou developed
ethosomes for transdermal drug delivery (54). Currently, ethanol can only be found in
relatively low concentrations in liposome formulations: 7% to 10% for Transfersomes, 14% for
Mibelle, and 16% for Natipide II. But, high content of ethanol was used in case of proniosomes
(30–50%) (55,56). Ethosomes are soft, malleable vesicles tailored for enhanced delivery of
various drugs to/through the skin and cellular membranes. Unlike conventional liposomes,
which are known mainly to deliver drugs to the outer layers of the skin, ethosomes were
shown to enhance permeation through the SC barrier. They penetrate skin and enhance drug
delivery to deep skin SC (34,47,54,57). They are noninvasive delivery carriers that enable drugs
to reach the deep skin layers and the systemic circulation.
Touitou et al. (34) investigated the effect of phospholipid and ethanol concentration on
the size distribution of ethosome vesicles. In the ethanol concentration range of 20% to 45%, the
size of the vesicles increased with decreasing ethanol concentration, with the largest sizes in
preparation containing 20% ethanol (193  8 nm) and the smallest in preparations containing
45% ethanol (103  9 nm). The dependence of vesicle size on phospholipid content was
determined for ethosomes containing 30% ethanol and PC concentration ranging from 0.5% to
4%. An eightfold increase in PC concentration (from 0.5% to 4%) resulted in a twofold increase
in ethosome size (from 118  2 to 249  24 nm). Also, ethanol imparted a negative charge to the
vesicles and improved the vesicle stability. Hydrophilic and hydrophobic chemicals can be
entrapped into ethosomes, and entrapment efficiency of hydrophobic chemicals was higher
than that of hydrophilic chemicals. Entrapment efficiencies of minoxidil, testosterone,
trihexylphenidyl (THP), and bacitracin were 83%  6%, 90%  3.5%, 75%  0.8%, and 77.4% 
2.9%, respectively (34,47,58).
Enhanced delivery of chemicals from the ethosomal carrier was observed in permeation
experiments with fluorescent probes (for detection of penetration depth) and drugs to nude
mouse skin. Hydrophilic calcein penetrated the skin to a depth of 160, 80, and 60 mm from
ethosomes, hydroethanolic solution (30% ethanol in water), and liposomes, respectively.
Lipophilic rhodamine red (RR) penetrated the nude mouse skin to a depth of 140 mm from
both the ethosomal system and from hydroethanolic solution. The probe into the fluorescence
intensity was significantly greater from the ethosomal system [150 arbitrary unit (AU) for
ethosomes and 40 AU for hydroethanolic solution]. Fluorescence was still visible at the deepest
skin layers (20 AU at 260-mm depth) in case of ethosomal system. Deep penetration from
liposomes was almost negligible (20 AU at 40-mm depth) (59).
Touitou et al. (34) also investigated the ability of ethosomes to deliver minoxidil to the
deep layers of the skin. When it permeated the skin, it was 45 and 35 times higher from the
ethosomal system than 30% ethanolic solution and absolute ethanol, respectively; the amount
of minoxidil in the skin was also seven and five times greater than control systems,
respectively. Similar results were obtained using acyclovir1, testosterone, and ionic molecules
such as propranolol and THP (34,47,60). Horwitz et al. (60) reported that acyclovir delivered
from an ethosomal system performed significantly better than Zovirax1 (GlaxoSmithKline,
Middlesex, U.K.). The amount of testosterone permeated in the rabbit skin in 24 hours was 30
times greater from the ethosomal system than from Testoderm1 (848.16  158.38 mg vs. 27.79
 16.23 mg). The amount of testosterone in the skin was also almost seven times greater when
the drug was delivered from ethosomal system (130.76 mg vs. 18.32 mg) (34). THP flux from
ethosomes (0.21 mg/cm2/hr) was 87, 51, and 4.5 times higher than that from liposomes, buffer,
and hydroethanolic solution, respectively (47). These data indicate that the ethosomal system
is a more effective permeation enhancer than ethanol and hydroethanolic solution. Table 3
802
Choi and Maibach

=== Page 820 ===
summarizes the ethosomal drug delivery to skin and cell membranes. Lodzki et al. (61) also
reported the cannabidiol1 transdermal delivery in a murine model. The flux of cannabidiol
differs depending on skin sites. After a 24-hour application, it permeated 37.43  13.58 and
110.07  24.15 mg cm2 into the hip skin and abdominal skin, respectively. Cannabidiol was
also detected in the muscle, liver, pancreas, and blood. Godin and Touitou (58) evaluated the
skin-depth penetration from bacitracin1 ethosomes in vivo in rats. After an eight-hour topical
application to rat abdomen, bacitracin penetrated more deeply into the skin from ethosomes
than 30% ethanolic solution and liposomes. Taken together, the ethosomal system is effective
in delivering drugs deeply into and through the skin.
Ethosomal systems are easy to prepare, nonirritant, and composed mainly of
phospholipids and ethanol; compounds commonly found in pharmaceutical preparations.
Ethosomes, because of their unique structure, are able to entrap and deliver through the skin
highly lipophilic molecules such as cannabinoids, testosterone, and minoxidil as well as
cationic drugs such as propanolol and trihexyphenidil. Enhanced delivery of bioactive
molecules through the skin and cellular membranes by means of an ethosomal carrier opens
numerous challenges and opportunities for the research and future development of novel
improved therapies.
ACTION MECHANISM OF ELASTIC VESICLES ON PENETRATION
How do phospholipid- and detergent-based elastic vesicles enhance drug penetration into the
skin? Two mechanisms can be proposed. First, the elastic vesicles can act as penetration
enhancers, whereby vesicle bilayers enter the SC and subsequently modify the intercellular
lipid matrix. This will facilitate the penetration of free drug molecules into and across the SC
(mechanism 1). Second, the elastic vesicles can act as drug-carrier systems, whereby intact
vesicles can enter the SC-carrying vesicle-bound molecules into the skin (mechanism 2) (32,45).
In order to assess whether a drug-carrier mechanism of action is involved or whether elastic
vesicles simply act as penetration enhancers, two important questions should be answered: (i)
Is pretreatment of the skin with empty vesicles sufficient (for mechanism 1), or is it essential to
incorporate drugs into the vesicle solution (for mechanism 2)? (ii) What is the effect of the
entrapment efficiency on the drug transport? Does higher entrapment efficiency result in a
higher drug transport?
Cevc et al. (19) proposed that Transfersomes are drug-carrier systems that can deliver
across the intact skin. It is believed that the successful passage of such carriers is based on two
important factors: the high elasticity (deformability) of the vesicle bilayers and the existence of
an osmotic gradient across the skin. Because of high deformability, Transfersomes could—
under influence of the transepidermal osmotic gradient—squeeze themselves between the cells
in the SC and carry large amounts of drugs across the intact skin. Fang et al. (18) investigated
the mechanism of vesicular system across the skin with soybean PC liposomes containing
enoxacin1. After a 12-hour pretreatment, drug permeation across PC-treated skin was higher
Table 3
Drug Skin Permeation from Ethosomal Vs. Control System
Drugs
Animal model
System
Qra (mg cm–2)
Qsa (mg cm–2)
References
Minoxidil1
Nude mouse
Ethosomes
673.0  92.0
69.6  11.0
34
30% EtOH
13.1  3.5
10.0  2.3
Trihexyphenidyl1
Nude mouse
Ethosomes
1750  250
586  77
47
30% EtOH
500  50
415  21
Cannabidiol1
Nude mouse
Ethosomes
110.07  24.15
–
61
Bacitracin1
Human
Ethosomes
12.0  1.0
–
58
Testosterone1
Rabbit
Ethosome patch
848.16  158.38
130.76  20.23
34
Testoderm1
27.79  16.23
18.32  8.34
aThe quantity of drugs that permeated the skin (Qr) and the quantity of drugs in the skin (Qs) in 24 or 18 hours
(trihexyphenidyl) were measured in diffusion cells from systems, each containing 0.5% minoxidil, 0.1% bacitracin,
1% trihexyphenidyl, 0.25 mg cm–2 testosterone.
Source: From Refs. 34, 47, 58, and 61.
Elastic Vesicles as Topical/Transdermal Drug Delivery Systems
803

=== Page 821 ===
than that across nontreated skin. Also, Verma et al. (17) reported that PC liposomes carry not
only the entrapped hydrophilic drug but also the nonentrapped drug into the SC and possibly
into the deeper skin layers. These results indicated that PC liposomes could serve as
permeation enhancers for drug delivery via the skin. With 5-fluorouracil Transfersomes, the
percentage of drug penetrated (13.5%) was higher than the drug entrapment efficiency (8.8%)
of Transfersomes (31). This strongly suggested that Transfersomes components may have
altered the skin structure, as a penetration enhancer. Taken together, Transfersomes may have
two functions to enhance drug transport across the skin, as a carrier system as well as a
penetration enhancer.
Several investigators reported that pretreatment of detergent-based elastic vesicles did
not improve the transport of pergolide and rotigotine, whereas higher entrapment efficiency
resulted in higher drug transport (32,46). These data suggest that a penetration-enhancing
process is not the main or the only mechanism of action, and detergent-based elastic vesicles
may act as a carrier system. Honeywell-Nguyen and Bouwstra (45) proposed that detergent-
based elastic vesicles facilitate drug transport by a fast partitioning in the SC, thereby carrying
vesicle-bound drug molecules into SC. The vesicles remain in the SC and do not penetrate into
the deeper skin layers. Hence, there are four major steps determining the effectiveness of the
elastic vesicles system: (i) the drug association to the vesicle bilayers, (ii) the partitioning of
vesicles into the SC, (iii) the drug release from the vesicles once in the SC, and (iv) the diffusion
of free drugs in the SC and partitioning into the viable skin tissue, and subsequently into the
systemic circulation (45). Taken together, they proposed that a penetration-enhancing effect of
the individual surfactant component is not the main or the only mechanism of action for the
elastic vesicles, and it is essential to apply drug molecules together with the vesicles.
Touitou et al. (34) proposed the action mechanism of ethosomal systems. First, ethanol
disturbs the organization of the SC lipid bilayer and enhances its lipid fluidity. The flexible
ethosome vesicles can then penetrate the disturbed SC bilayers. The release of the drug in the
deep layers of the skin and its transdermal absorption could then be the result of a fusion of
ethosomes with skin lipids, and drug release at various points along the penetration pathway.
Unlike other elastic vesicles, occlusion slightly increased the skin penetration of ethosomes.
This result indicated that the existence of an osmotic gradient across the skin was not an
important factor (58). These data differ from that observed with elastic vesicles, where
permeation enhancement occurred only in nonocclusive conditions, and point toward different
mechanisms of action of the two carriers.
To further investigate mechanism of ethosomal skin permeation, Godin and Touitou (58)
used double-staining methods; ethosomes co-loaded with two fluorescent probes, RR and
FITC-bacitracin (FITC-Bac). Both probes were delivered from ethosomes to a maximal possible
depth of 200 mm. When the two probes were observed separately at the skin depth of 90 mm, it
was clearly seen that the delivery of FITC-Bac from ethosomes was followed by the delivery of
ethosomal components in the same area. Skin penetration profile date indicated that
penetration of ethosomal vesicles into the skin peaked at approximately 40 mm, while
depth of maximum bacitracin penetration was approximately 90 mm, suggesting that the
release of the drug in deep skin layers occurred. In a double-staining study, the bacitracin,
delivered from ethosomes, entered the skin between the coreocytes through the intercellular
lipid domain. High content of ethanol fluidizes the ethosomal membranes to produce highly
deformable vesicles, and subsequently ethosomes squeeze drugs between the cells in the SC
and carry large amounts of drugs across the intact skin (31,48). Additionally, we cannot
exclude the possibility that ethosomes can be trapped in follicles and delivered to deep layers
of the skin.
CONCLUSIONS
Highly deformable elastic vesicles (Transfersomes, ethosomes, detergent-based elastic vesilces)
improve the transdermal delivery of low and high molecules in vitro and in vivo systems. The
use of elastic vesicles as a vesicular drug carrier could overcome the limitation of low
penetration ability of conventional liposomes or commercial ointment across the skin.
Penetrating-enhancing effects of phosphlipid- and detergent-based elastic vesicles act as a
drug carrier system as well as penetration enhancers. For optimal drug delivery, it is essential
804
Choi and Maibach

=== Page 822 ===
that drug molecules are associated with vesicles and applies with co-application (co-treatment)
conditions. In in vivo study, Transfersomes and ethosomes showed better biological activity in
comparison with conventional liposomes or commercial ointment. Thus, many topical drugs
may be developed using elastic vesicles. However, a more extensive study about vesicular type
and compositions should be undertaken to fully establish the optimal condition, for which
elastic vesicles are the most suitable vehicles.
REFERENCES
1. Barry BW. Novel mechanisms and devices to enable successful transdermal drug delivery. Eur
J Pharm Sci 2001; 14:101–114.
2. Schurer NY, Elias PM. The biochemistry and function of stratum corneum lipids. Adv Lipid Res 1991;
24:27–56.
3. Banga AK, Bose S, Ghost TK. Iontophoresis and electroporation: comparison and contrasts. Int
J Pharm 1999; 179:1–19.
4. Regnier V, Preat V. Localization of a FITC-labeled phosphorothioate oligonucleotide in the skin after
topical delivery by iontophoresis and electroporation. Pharm Res 1998; 15:1596–1602.
5. Mezei M, Gulasekharam V. Liposomes: a selective drug delivery system for the topical route
administration. Part I. Lotion dosage forms. Life Sci 1980; 26:1473–1477.
6. Yoshioka T, Sternberg B, Florence AT. Preparation and properties of vesicles (niosomes) of sorbitan
monoesters 9 (Span 20, 40, 60 and 80) and a sorbitan triester (Span 85). Int J Pharm 1994; 105:1–6.
7. Williams AC, Barry BW. Penetration enhancers. Adv Drug Del Rev 2004; 56:603–618.
8. Elias PM, Tsai J, Menon GK, et al. The potential of metabolic interventions to enhance transdermal
drug delivery. J Invest Dermatol Sym Proc 2002; 7:79–85.
9. Lasic DD. Doxorubicin in sterically stabilized liposomes. Nature 1996; 380:561–562.
10. Abra RM, Bankert RB, Chen F, et al. The next generation of liposome delivery system: recent
experience with tumor-targeted, sterically stabilized immunoliposomes and active-loading gradients.
J Liposome Res 2002; 12:1–3.
11. Clemons KV, Stevens DA. Comparative efficacies of four amphotericin B formula-tions – Fungizone,
amphotech (Amphocil), AmBisome, and Abelcet –– against systemic murine aspergillosis. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2004; 48:1047–1050.
12. Choi MJ, Maibach HI. Topical vaccination of DNA antigens: topical delivery of DNA antigens. Skin
Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2003; 16:271–282.
13. Chang JS, Choi MJ, Cheong HS, et al. Development of Th1-mediated CD8þ effector T cells by
vaccination with epitope peptides encapsulated in pH-sensitive liposomes. Vaccine 2001; 19:3608–3614.
14. Chang JS, Choi MJ, Kim TY, et al. Immunogenecity of synthetic HIV-1 V3 loop peptides by MPL
adjuvanted pH-sensitive liposomes. Vaccine 1999; 17:1540–1548.
15. Chang JS, Choi MJ. pH-Sensitive liposomes as adjuvants for peptide antigens. Methods Enzymol
2003; 373:127–136.
16. Touitou E, Junginger HE, Weiner ND, et al. Liposomes as carriers for topical and transdermal
delivery. J Pharm Sci 1994; 83:1189–1203.
17. Verma DD, Verma S, Blume G, et al. Liposomes increase skin penetration of entrapped and non-
entrapped hydrophilic substances into human skin: a skin penetration and confocal laser scanning
microscopy study. Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2003; 55:271–277.
18. Fang JY, Hong CT, Chiu WT, et al. Effect of liposomes and niosome on skin permeation of enoxacin.
Int J Pharm 2001; 219:61–72.
19. Cevc G, Blume G. Lipid vesicles penetrate into intact skin owing to the transdermal osmotic gradients
and hydration force. Biochim Biophys Acta 1992; 1104:226–232.
20. Cevc G. Transfersomes, liposomes and other lipid suspensions on the skin: permeation enhancement,
vesicle penetration, and transdermal drug delivery. Crit Rev Ther Drug Carrier Syst 1996; 13:257–388.
21. Van den Bergh BAI. Elastic liquid state vesicles as a tool for topical drug delivery. Thesis. Leiden
University, The Netherlands, pp. 49–80( 1999).
22. Trotta M, Peira E, Debernardi F, et al. Elastic liposomes for skin delivery of dipotassium
glycyrrhizinate. Int J Pharm 2002; 241:319–327.
23. Trotta M, Peira E, Carlotti ME, et al. Deformable liposomes for dermal administration of
methotrexate. Int J Pharm 2004; 270:119–125.
24. Jain S, Jain P, Umamaheshwari RB, et al. Transferosmes—a novel vesicular carrier for enhanced
transdermal delivery: development, characterization, and performance evaluation. Drug Dev Ind
Pharm 2003; 29:1013–1026.
25. Cevc G, Blume G. New, highly efficient formulation of diclofenac for the topical, transdermal
administration in ultradeformable drug carriers, Transfersomes. Biochim Biophys Acta 2001; 1514:191–205.
Elastic Vesicles as Topical/Transdermal Drug Delivery Systems
805

=== Page 823 ===
26. Paul A, Cevc G, Bachhawat BK. Transdermal immunization with an intergral membrane component,
gap junction protein, by means of ultradeformable drug carriers, Transfer-somes. Vaccine 1998;
16:188–195.
27. Cevc G, Gebauer D, Stieber J, et al. Ultraflexible vesicles, Transfer-somes, have an extremely low pore
penetration resistance and transport therapeutic amounts of insulin across the intact mammalian skin.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1998; 1368:201–215.
28. Guo J, Ping Q, Sun G, et al. Lecithin vesicular carriers for transdermal delivery of cyclosporin A. Int
J Pharm 2000; 194:201–207.
29. El Maghraby GMM, Williams AC, Barry BW. Oestradiol skin delivery from deformable liposomes:
refinement of surfactant concentration. Int J Pharm 2000; 196:63–74.
30. El Maghraby GMM, Williams AC, Barry BW. Skin delivery of oestradiol from lipid vesicles:
importance of liposome structure. Int J Pharm 2000; 204:159–169.
31. El Maghraby GMM, Williams AC, Barry BW. Skin delivery of 5-fluorouracil from ultra-deformable
and standard liposomes in-vitro. J Pharm Pharmacol 2001; 53:1069–1077.
32. Honeywell-Nguyen PL, Arenja S, Bouwstra JA. Skin penetration and mechanisms of action in the
delivery of the D2-agonist rotigotine from surfactant-based elastic vesicle formulation. Pharm Res
2003; 20:1619–1625.
33. Honeywell-Nguyen PL, Frederik PM, Bomans PHH, et al. Transdermal delivery of pergolide from
surfactant-based elastic and rigid vesicles: characterization and in vitro transport studies. Pharm Res
2002; 19:992–998.
34. Touitou E, Dayan N, Bergelson L, et al. Ethosomes-novel vesicular carriers: characterization and
delivery properties. J Control Release 2000; 65:403–418.
35. Cevc G, Blume G. Biological activity and characteristics of triamcinolone-actonide formulated with
the self-regulating drug carriers, Transfersomes. Biochim Biophys Acta 2003; 1614:156–164.
36. Cevc G. Transdermal drug delivery of insulin with ultradeformable carriers. Clin Pharmacokinet
2003; 42:461–474.
37. Hofer C, Gobel R, Deering P, et al. Formulation of interleukin-2 and interferon-alpha containing
ultradeformable carriers for potential transdermal application. Anticancer Res 1999; 19:1505–1507.
38. Kim A, Lee EH, Choi SH, et al. In vitro and in vivo transfection efficiency of a novel ultradeformable
cationic liposome. Biomaterials 2004; 25:305–313.
39. Hofland HEJ, van der Geest R, Bodde HE, et al. Estradiol permeation from nonionic surfactant
vesicles through human stratum corneum in vitro. Pharm Res 1994; 11:659–664.
40. Abraham W, Downing DT. Interaction between corneocytes and stratum corneum lipid liposomes in
vitro. Biochim Biophys Acta 1990; 1021:119–125.
41. Van Kuijk-Meuwissen MEMJ, Junginger HE, Bouwstra JA. Interactions between liposomes and human
skin in vitro, a confocal laser scanning microscopy study. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998; 1371:31–39.
42. Van den Bergh BA, Bouwstra JA, Junginger HE, et al. Elasticity of vesicles affects hairless mouse skin
structure and permeability. J Control Release 1999; 62:367–379.
43. Scha¨tzlein A, Cevc G. Non-uniform cellular packing of the stratum corneum and permeability barrier
function of intact skin: a high-resolution confocal laser scanning microscopy study using highly
deformable vesicles (Transfersomes). Br J Dermatol 1998; 138:583–592.
44. Van den Bergh BAI, Vroom J, Gerritsen H, et al. Interactions of elastic and rigid vesicles with human
skin in vitro: electron microscopy and two photon excitation microscopy. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999;
1461:155–173.
45. Honeywell-Nguyen PL, Bouwstra JA. The in vitro transport of pergolide from surfactant-based elastic
vesicles through human skin: a suggested mechanism of action. J Control Release 2003; 86:145–156.
46. Honeywell-Nguyen PL, Wouter Groenink HW, de Graaff AM, et al. The in vivo transport of elastic
vesicles into human skin: effects of occlusion, volume and duration of application. J Control Release
2003; 90:243–255.
47. Dayan N, Touitou E. Carriers for skin delivery of trihexyphenidyl HCl: ethosomes vs. liposomes.
Biomaterials 2000; 21:1879–1885.
48. Valjakka-Koskela R, Kirjavainen M, Mo¨nkko¨nen J, et al. Enhancement of percutaneous absorption of
naproxen by phospholipids. Int J Pharm 1998; 175:225–230.
49. Cevc G, Blume G, Scha¨tzlein A, et al. The skin: a pathway for systemic treatment with patches and
lipid-based agent carriers. Adv Drug Del Rev 1996; 18:349–378.
50. Planas ME, Gonzalez P, Rodriguez L, et al. Noninvasive percutaneous induction of topical analgesia
by a new type carrier and prolongation of local pain insensitivity by anesthetic liposomes. Anesth
Analg 1992; 75:615–621.
51. Cevc G, Blume G, Scha¨tzlein A. Transfersomes-mediated transepidermal delivery improves the
regiospecificity and biological activity of corticosteroids in vivo. J Control Release 1997; 45:211–226.
52. Honeywell-Nguyen PL, van den Bussche MH, Junginger HE, et al. The effect of surfactant-based elastic
and rigid vesicles on the penetration of lidocaine across human skin. STP Pharma 2002; 12:257–262.
806
Choi and Maibach

=== Page 824 ===
53. Bouwstra JA, De Graaff A, Groenik W, et al. Elastic vesicles: interaction with human skin and drug
transport. Cell Mol Biol Lett 2002; 7:222–223.
54. Touitou E. Compositions for applying active substances to or through the skin. US patent 5540934.
1996.
55. Fang JY, Yu SY, Wu PC, et al. In vitro skin permeation of oestradiol from various proniosome
formulations. Int J Pharm 2001; 215:91–99.
56. Vora B, Khopade AJ, Jain NK. Proniosome based transdermal delivery of levonorgestrel for effective
contraception. J Control Release 1998; 54:149–165.
57. Touitou E, Godin B, Weiss C. Enhanced delivery of drugs into and across the skin by ethosomal
carriers. Drug Dev Res 2000; 50:406–412.
58. Godin B, Touitou E. Mechanism of bacitracin permeation enhancement through the skin and cellular
membranes from an ethosomal carrier. J Control Release 2004; 94:365–379.
59. Touitou E, Godin B, Dayan N, et al. Intracellular delivery mediated by an ethosomal carrier.
Biomaterials 2001; 22:3053–3059.
60. Horwitz E, Pisanty S, Czerninski R, et al. A clinical evaluation of a novel liposomal carrier for
acyclovir in the topical treatment of recurrent herpes labialis. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 1999; 87:700–705.
61. Lodzki M, Godin B, Rakou L, et al. Cannabidiol-transdermal delivery and anti-inflammatory effect in
murine model. J Control Release 2003; 93:377–387.
Elastic Vesicles as Topical/Transdermal Drug Delivery Systems
807

=== Page 826 ===
74
Polymers Effect on Chemical Partition
Coefficient Between Powdered Human Stratum
Corneum and Water
Ronald C. Wester, Xiaoying Hui, Philip G. Hewitt, Jurij J. Hostynek, and Howard I. Maibach
Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Scott Krauser and Thomas Chan
MacroChem Corporation, Lexington, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
Macromolecules have gained interest as potential active entities and as modulators of
percutaneous delivery systems. Some success in percutaneous delivery using enhancer is being
reported, despite these compounds exceeding the “500 Dalton rule” (1). Another approach is to
use macromolecules as transdermal transport facilitators, where the presence of macro-
molecules can interact at the skin surface that facilitates the passage of another chemical or
drug (2). These macromolecules can interact at the skin surface, interphasing with cosmetic
ingredients to alter the initial phase of percutaneous absorption, which is the initial partition
into the skin.
Powdered human stratum corneum (PHSC), a product made from foot callus, can be cut
into smaller pieces and ground with dry ice to form a powder. Uniformity in particle size is
achieved with sieving. The callus is human stratum corneum (SC) derived and thus, should
retain some physical and chemical characteristics of human SC (3,4). Two macromolecular
polymers have been synthesized to hold cosmetic and drug compounds on the skin surface.
The effect these two polymers have on the partition coefficient (PC) (SC/water) was investigated
on the PHSC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Compounds
MacroDermTM L (lipophilic MW 2081) is a block polymer of propylene oxide with
hydrocarbon end groups that is completely insoluble in water. MacroDerm H (hydrophilic
MW 2565) is a block polymer of ethylene oxide with hydrocarbon end groups. This latter
material swells in water and exhibits amphipathic characteristics, but does not dissolve. Both
materials are soluble in most organic solvents, including ethanol (5).
[14C]-Estradiol—a model compound—(DuPont NEN) had specific activity of 54.1 mCi/
mmol, and radiochemical purity was 99%, as determined by high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and thin-layer chromatography (TLC).
Preparation of Powdered Human Stratum Corneum
Human foot callus was cut into fine pieces and ground in a Micro-mill Grinder (Bel-Air
Products, Pequannode, New Jersey, U.S.) in the presence of dry ice to form powder. Particles of
PHSC that pass through a 50-mesh sieve but not 80-mesh sieve were used. This particle size
(180–300 mm) has previously been used in published studies (3,4).
Partition Coefficient Incubations
Into a specially designed glass centrifuge tube (6 cm length  1 cm diameter; O.Z. Glass
Company, Pinole, California, U.S.), with a glass fritte (40 mm) fitted in on the end, 10 mg of
PHSC was mixed with 4 mL of [14C]-estradiol in water. After incubating with estradiol for
different lengths of time (0, 2, 6, 12, and 24 hours), the mixture was separated by centrifugation
(15 minutes at 1500  g). Water was passed through the glass fritte and collected into receiving

=== Page 827 ===
centrifuge tubes. PHSC was then washed twice with water, with vigorous mixing and further
centrifugations. Each subsequent supernatant was collected separately. Water and remaining
dry PHSC were mixed with the scintillation cocktail (Universol-ES, ICN, Costa Mesa,
California, U.S.), and then assayed for radioactivity by liquid scintillation spectrophotometry.
Five replicate tubes were prepared for each test sample. Three concentrations of estradiol were
chosen (2.8, 0.28, and 0.028 mm/mL).
Delipidization of PHSC
PHSC was delipidized by incubation in chloroform:methanol (2:1) for 16 hours, then centrifuged
and air-dried.
Polymer Incubation
Three concentrations of each polymer were used (1, 5, and 10% w/v in ethanol). There was a
30-minute preincubation period (with agitation) with the polymer solutions, and PHSC was
washed twice with 50% ethanol and finally once with water. The resulting dry PHSC was then
incubated for two hours with the same three concentrations of estradiol as previously described.
Calculation of PHSC/Water Partition Coefficient
The following equation was used to calculate PC:
PCPHSC=Water ¼
dpm PHSC=mg PHSC
ðdpmi  dpm PHSC=mg waterÞ
where dpmi represents the initial concentration of estradiol in water (in desintegration per
minute units). Statistical significance was determined using sigma stat.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The PC values obtained after different incubation times, different estradiol concentrations, and
in delipidized PHSC are shown in Table 1. There was no statistically significant effect (p > 0.05)
on PC values when the concentration of estradiol was increased 100-fold (from 0.028 to
2.8 mm/mL), when the incubation period was increased from 0 to 24 hours, or when PHSC was
delipidized prior to incubation with estradiol. In general, the log PC values obtained for
estradiol ranged from 1.6 to 1.9, indicating an intermediate affinity of estradiol for PHSC
compared with water. The data indicate a rapid partitioning of estradiol into human skin with
no apparent lag time in partitioning for this chemical, which is probably because of the
lipophilicity of the compound (log Po/w ¼ 2.70). Therefore, a two-hour incubation period was
chosen for further studies with estradiol. The log PC values obtained (1.6–1.9) agreed with
other similar work; for example, Surber et al. (6) reported a log PCPHSC/water value for estradiol
of 2.1 and Hui et al. calculated the value to be 1.2. Therefore, the new glass vials developed for
these assays appear consistent with older methods. Surber et al., (6) also showed the process of
delipidization of the SC that had little or no effect on the PC of estradiol. This result is
consistent with the data reported here.
Table 1
Effect of Time, Estradiol Concentration, and PHSC Delipidation on the PHSC/Water Partition Coefficient
Log PCPHSC/water (mean  SD, n ¼ 5)
Time (hr)
Delipidized PHSC
[2.8 mm/mL]a
Normal PHSC
[2.8 mm/mL]a
Normal PHSC
[0.28 mm/mL]a
Normal PHSC
[0.028 mm/mL]a
0
1.22  0.17
1.57  0.17
1.81  0.30
1.20  0.32
2
1.67  0.22
1.62  0.14
1.68  0.11
1.71  0.13
6
1.89  0.09
1.68  0.14
1.78  0.07
1.79  0.05
12
1.75  0.15
1.71  0.26
1.70  0.33
1.70  0.23
24
1.88  0.05
2.16  0.55
1.79  0.04
1.79  0.17
aConcentration of estradiol used in each incubation.
810
Wester et al.

=== Page 828 ===
The results in Table 2 show that polymer L had no effect on the estradiol PC between
PHSC and water. This result was consistent for all three concentrations of estradiol. Polymer H
showed a significant increase (p < 0.01) in log PC for estradiol concentrations of 2.8 and 0.28 mg/
mL; this increase was dependent on the polymer concentration. At 10% polymer H, PC was
increased by a factor of 2, and at 1% polymer, there was no statistical difference from control,
untreated values. At the lowest estradiol concentration (0.028 mm/mL), the increase in PC was
not as prominent, although still significant (p < 0.05) at 10% and 5% polymer. These results
suggest that no polymer adhered to the PHSC during the 30-minute preincubation, or was
completely removed by washing. The hydrophilic polymer H had a statistically significant effect
(p < 0.05) on the estradiol PHSC/water PC, with increases of up to sixfold observed. The binding
also exhibited a dose concentration-dependent response. This dose dependency is indicative of
polymer binding to the SC and estradiol preferentially “binding” to the polymer rather than
water. In addition, the dose dependency may be due to hydrophilic nature of polymer H, which
can “swell” in the presence of water, hence absorbing additional water containing estradiol.
The data show a promising effect for a polymer in increasing the partitioning of a
chemical of intermediate lipophilicity (be it a fragrance or other cosmetic ingredient) into the
outer layers of the skin. Thus, a macromolecular chemical has the potential to alter the first step
in percutaneous absorption, the partitioning of a drug or fragrance from its formulation into
the skin. The data also show that PHSC may be a simple and cost effective method to screen
macromolecules for potential improvement in percutaneous delivery. However, the consis-
tency of this effect with other chemicals, of differing physicochemical properties, must first be
established before firm conclusions can be drawn. These data derived from a model
compound—estradiol—possibly to likely will be relevant to cosmetic/cosmeceutical ingre-
dients of related physical/chemical properties. In addition, the newly designed glass tubes
have proven to be a quick and reliable method for the determination of PHSC/water PCs.
REFERENCES
1. Bos JD, Meinardi MMHM. The 500 dalton rule for the skin penetration of chemical compounds and
drugs. Exp Dermatol 2000; 9:165–169.
2. Vanbever R, Prausnitz MR, Prat V. Macromolecules as novel transdermal transport enhancers for skin
electroporation. Pharm Res 1997; 14:638–644.
3. Wester RC, Mobayen M, Maibach HI. In vivo absorption and binding to powdered human stratum
corneum as methods to evaluate skin absorption of environmental chemical contaminants from
ground and surface water. J Toxicol Environ Health 1987; 21:367–374.
4. Hui X, Wester RC, Magee PS, et al. Partitioning of chemicals from water into powdered human
stratum corneum (callus) – a model study. In Vitro Toxicol 1995; 8(2):159–167.
5. Samour CM, Krauser SF. Cationic film-forming polymer compositions, and use thereof in topical agents
delivery systems and methods of delivering agent to the skin. US patent 5 807 957. Sept 15, 1998.
6. Surber C, Wilhelm K-P, Hori M, et al. Optimization of topical therapy: partitioning of drugs into the
stratum corneum. Pharm Res 1990; 7:1320–1324.
Table 2
Effect of Two Polymers (L and H) on the Estradiol PC Between PHSC and Water
LogPCPHSC/water (mean  SD, n ¼ 5)
Estradiol concentration (mm/mL)
Polymer concentration
2.8
0.28
0.028
Polymer H (hydrophilic polymer)
10%
2.31  0.22a
2.36  0.14a
2.13  0.07a
5%
1.93  0.10b
2.06  0.21b
1.94  0.06b
1%
1.71  0.10
1.61  0.19
1.59  0.26
Polymer L (lipophilic polymer)
10%
1.74  0.10
1.65  0.07
1.61  0.14
5%
1.70  0.20
1.62  0.17
1.65  0.09
1%
1.59  0.19
1.57  0.15
1.71  0.07
Control (no polymer)
1.62  0.14
1.68  0.11
1.71  0.13
aStatistically significantly different from control (p < 0.01).
bStatistically significantly different from control (p < 0.05).
Polymers Effect on Chemical Partition Coefficient
811

=== Page 830 ===
75
General Concepts of Ethics in Human Testing
Klaus E. Andersen
Department of Dermatology, Odense University Hospital, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
COSMETICS MUST BE SAFE
According to the European Union (EU) Cosmetics Directive (Council Directive 93/35/EEC,
article 2), cosmetic products must not cause damage to human health when used under normal
and foreseeable conditions of use. This is in line with the expectations in society and among
consumers. Cosmetic products must be safe.
Side Effects Do Occur
However, on the other hand, consumers also know that they may experience adverse reactions
related to the use of cosmetic products. Usually, the reactions are so mild that the consumers
do not seek medical advice, but just stop using the suspected product or change to alternative
products. A 20-year old questionnaire survey, including about 1000 individuals from the
normal population in United Kingdom, showed that 8.3% claimed to have experienced
adverse reactions from the use of cosmetics (1). About 1% of the study group were later shown
to have allergic patch test reactions to a cosmetic ingredient. A Danish study evaluated
sensitization to cosmetic ingredients in an unselected population, comprising 567 subjects
patch tested with ready-to-use patch test kits (TRUE test panel 1 and 2). It was found that 3.2%
of males and 4.2% of females were sensitized to cosmetic allergens in this series of 24 common
contact allergens (2). From dermatological clinics also it is well documented in eczema patients
that cosmetic products are a common source of irritant- and allergic-contact dermatitis.
Further, there are other types of skin side effects reported; such as photosensitivity,
acnegenicity, contact urticaria, changes in pigmentation, and subjective symptoms as burning
and stinging sensations in the skin.
Debate on Cosmetic Safety and Ethics of Testing is Needed
This is the background for the discussion on ethics and safety issues in relation to cosmetic
testing. If we do not face the ethical problems, the impression may be that they do not exist!
The key notions of the scientific community are therefore an open debate among peers,
enforcement of law and regulations, training of authorities, industry and safety assessors, and
information to the public and debate.
TESTING OF COSMETIC PRODUCTS IS NOT COMPULSORY,
BUT MAY BE WARRANTED
The EU Council Directive 93/35/EEC regulates the manufacture and marketing of cosmetic
products in the EU. In theory, cosmetic ingredients and products testing can be performed in
vitro, in vivo in animals, and in humans.
Safety Tests
Testing of products is not required, because in general the toxicity profile of a cosmetic product
can be derived from the knowledge of the toxicity of cosmetic ingredients. The directive contains
positive and negative lists of cosmetic ingredients. Most ingredients are tested according to the
methods required for industrial chemicals as given by the EU or OECD, and certain types of
ingredients as preservatives, UV filters, and colorants need approval prior to their inclusion in
cosmetic formulations. However, industry wants additional information on the finished products
under certain circumstances; for example, to test for compound effects caused by interaction
between ingredients, which may change the toxicological profile of the product.

=== Page 831 ===
Tests to Support Claims
On the other hand product testing may also be warranted by industry to document claimed
efficacy and to support marketing and not just to provide assurance about the safety of the
product.
No “Cookery Book” Testing
There is no “cookery book” description on how to test cosmetic products. In predictive testing,
in general, it is important to recognize that a test method only gives answers related to the type
of side effect it is developed for!
Possible adverse reactions include skin irritation, contact allergy, photo-mediated
reactions, acne, contact urticaria, pigment changes, hair and nail changes, subjective
symptoms, and various end points measured by noninvasive techniques (elasticity, skin
thickness, wringling, roughness etc.). Therefore, it is not possible to make a complete list
of current testing methods. The design of the test protocol depends on the specific
question asked. In each case the reasoning and the scientific background of the test should
be given.
Animal Tests
For more than 50 years, animal assays for skin irritation and skin sensitization have been
routinely used with success (3). They have proven good predictivity for significant skin
sensitizers and corrosive and moderately irritant substances. However, the animal assays have
limited discriminative power, when it comes to mild effects, as the ones expected from
cosmetic ingredients and products (4). When it concerns skin irritation, the animal skin with
important structural and physiologic differences compared with human skin simply lacks the
multitude of reaction patterns possible in human skin. Until recent years, laboratory animal-
test methods have been used for testing of cosmetic ingredients and products in spite of the
inherent difficulties related to extrapolation, from animal-test data to human–consumer
exposure risk. However, the 7th amendment to the Cosmetics Directive [2003/15/EC] says
that safety of cosmetic ingredients and products in the future must be assured without the use
of animal tests. The consumer council in Brussels has managed to reach a qualified majority
agreement on the proposal to ban:
l The placing on the market after 2013 of cosmetic products, of which the final
formulation is tested on animals, as well as cosmetic products containing ingredients
tested on animals for those cases where validated alternative test methods are
available.
l Testing final products on animals.
l Testing of ingredients or combinations of ingredients on animals, when such tests can
be replaced by one or many alternative methods figuring in Annex V of Directive 67/
548/EEC or in Annex IX of the cosmetics directive.
Until 2007, Annex IX of the cosmetics directive contains no alternative methods that offer
consumers a degree of protection similar to the animal tests that they aim to replace. The
validation process for alternative methods is complicated and time consuming, so the
definitive ban is postponed until further notice. New in vivo animal data for cosmetic
ingredients and formulations will not be generated. The agreement tries to strike a balance
between human health and animal welfare, while abiding by World Trade Organization rules.
This change could result in animal testing moving into third countries instead of avoiding
them. This is because cosmetic products tested on animals outside the EU could be sold in the
EU without any restrictions. As a consequence, this measure could take the pressure from the
authorities and the industry to further develop and adopt alternative methods.
HUMAN SAFETY TESTS
Ethical Considerations
The risk to a volunteer participating in cosmetic testing cannot be weighed against a benefit, as
is the case when testing of pharmaceuticals. Finished cosmetic products must be shown to be
essentially safe prior to human exposure. Transient effects may be ethically acceptable, such as
814
Andersen

=== Page 832 ===
slight irritation, whereas adverse and permanent health effects, such as sensitization or
scarring, are not. A minimal risk is acceptable (5). This is equivalent to daily life situations
where there is either a chance of a trivial reaction, such as slight eczema or sunburn, or where
there is a minimal risk of a serious disability or death, comparable with that of being a
passenger in a scheduled airline flight. The Food and Drug Administration has also defined
minimal risk, as the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort not greater than those
ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or
psychological examinations or tests.
On the other hand, it is not sufficient to satisfy requirement for minimal risk, recruitment,
and informed consent of volunteers. Clinical studies should aim to answer an experimental
question that cannot be answered in any other way. The test results should add value to the
understanding of the product toxicity and benefit the consumers in terms of additional safety.
Studies with ill-defined aims and poor experimental design will be of no value to the product
risk assessment and may just generate a false feel-good factor, and the results may be used as
an unethical basis for marketing purposes. There is a gray zone to efficacy testing that can only
be performed when there is evidence that the product does not cause local or systemic adverse
reactions. Market research trials may give additional confidence in the degree of tolerance in
the consumer population. Any adverse reaction data from such human volunteer market
research trials may be useful in the evaluation of product compatibility, but this should not be
the primary purpose of the trial design. The rationale for human volunteer use in cosmetics
testing must be continually challenged to ensure good clinical practice and ethical justification.
Notes of Guidance
In the “Notes of Guidance for Testing of Cosmetic Ingredients for their Safety Evaluation” (6),
published by the Scientific Committee on Consumer Products (SCCP), human data are
mentioned as a possibility when evaluating the safety of cosmetics. However, the document
does not specify these in detail. Regarding skin irritation, the SCCP considers that at present
human testing of cosmetic ingredients should not be preferred to animal testing.
In this context, the scientific and ethical considerations for testing cosmetic ingredients
on human subjects need to be defined more clearly. The skin irritancy reaction in humans is
not an absolute measure and must be related to appropriate controls defining the range of
response.
Prerequisites for Human Testing
At the European Community level, there is virtually no formal legislation addressing human
experimentation.
A number of points shall be considered in relation to human tests (7):
1.
Tests in animals or validated alternative methods are of limited value regarding their
predictive value for exposure of a human population. Therefore, confirmatory safety tests
in humans may be necessary scientifically and ethically provided that the toxicological
profile of a compound is available on the basis of animal or alternative methods.
2.
Confirmatory testing of compounds in humans must only be undertaken when there
is adequate information to suggest that a high degree of safety is to be expected.
3.
Confirmatory tests of ingredients/products in humans must be limited to situations
where no irreversible damaging effects are to be expected for the volunteers, and where
the study goal is reasonably achievable with a study population of limited size.
4.
Human volunteers should not be employed in investigation for eye irritation and
sensitization or other toxicological trials where the outcome may be irreversible.
5.
The recruitment of human volunteers should be in line with the “World Medical
Association Declaration of Helsinki” in its current revision: Human testing is to be
conducted and monitored under the direction of relevantly trained personnel to
ensure the health and well being of volunteer subjects involved in the testing. The
health and welfare of the subject has first priority and is highly protected.
6.
“The Good Clinical Practice for trials on Medicinal Products in the European Community” is
a valuable guide.
7.
National regulations regarding human studies should be followed.
8.
Test protocols should be submitted to the responsible ethical committee.
General Concepts of Ethics in Human Testing
815

=== Page 833 ===
Procedure of Irritancy Assessment in Human Volunteers
On the basis of a low irritation potential as proven by animal or future validated in vitro
methods, the skin tolerability of a substance can be confirmed by testing in human volunteers.
A number of test protocols are available, such as open- and closed-patch tests, single- and
repeated-exposure tests, and use tests. They should be chosen on the basis of the relevant use
pattern of the ingredient (8).
l In the open test, the substance is applied on the skin without occlusion for time periods
between 15 minutes and 24 hours. This test allows the assessment of concentrated
products.
l In closed-patch tests, diluted or undiluted products are applied under occlusive
chambers over 24 or 48 hours. The test allows the comparative study of substances in
the same individual.
l Cumulative or repetitive closed-patch tests involve applications on the same test site
between one and seven times per week over a period of one to five weeks. These
repetitive tests allow the assessment of cumulative irritation that is missed by single
application tests.
l Used or repeated open application tests (ROAT) imply the repeated application of a
substance closely modeled to the use situation.
While these tests historically have been assessed by clinical methods, noninvasive
bioengineering technology such as measurement of transepidermal water loss or of blood flow
may provide higher sensitivity and objectivity to these tests, and thereby reduce the exposure
and risk to volunteers.
However, neither the above confirmatory tests nor the use of bioengineering methods
have been validated according to modern scientific criteria (9).
Assessment of Sensitization Potential in Human Volunteers is Discouraged
Sensitization potential has also been investigated using human volunteers, and the develop-
ment of animal sensitization tests has been partly based on comparison with human tests
performed with the same chemicals (10). Further, human testing has the advantage that
extrapolation of the test results from one species to another is avoided.
Human predictive skin sensitization tests have been in use for the past 50 years. They
have been used more widely in the United States than in Europe. Contract laboratories have
performed the vast majority of human sensitization tests, and the scientific literature contains a
limited number of publications giving results from tests with cosmetic ingredients as
preservatives and fragrance chemicals. There are a number of different human sensitization
tests available. They vary with regard to the number of induction patch tests, the placing of the
patches, and the use of a maximization step. However, it is not entirely clear how useful these
variations are because validation of the tests has not kept pace with development of new tests.
The human sensitization tests require great experience in design and execution of the test, and
a number of artifacts are possible.
Three different approaches, for predictive testing in man, have been in use:
1.
A single induction/single challenge patch test
2.
Human Repeated Insult Patch Tests (HRIPT)
3.
Human Maximization Test
The performance of the different test methods depends on a number of factors, including
type of test substance (ingredient or finished product), chemistry and animal toxicological data
available, and intended use of the product.
Concerns Regarding the Use of Human Volunteers for Predictive Allergenicity Tests
Cosmetic ingredients identified as sensitizers in animal assays or other validated assays, when
existing, should not be studied in humans. The human sensitization tests are time consuming
and very expensive because a large number of volunteers (150–200) are required in each
test; however, considerably less number of volunteers (25) are required for the human
816
Andersen

=== Page 834 ===
maximization test, which, as the name says, maximizes the response to a certain degree. The
argument for reducing the number of volunteers in the human maximization test is the
amplifying step introduced by treatment with an irritant test product or sodium lauryl sulfate.
Further, the selection of human volunteers usually results in the use of an inhomogeneous test
group (compared with the more homogeneous group used for animal experiments). The large
numbers of participants in most of these tests are necessary to reduce the 95% confidence
interval for the test result, otherwise the likelihood of unpredicted responses in the consumers
increase. If, for instance, no positive reaction occurred in 100 induced test subjects, then for
statistical reasons up to 36 of 1000 consumers may react.
In any case, it is scientifically inadequate and unethical to perform predictive tests with a
number of subjects insufficient to produce valid data.
The performance of human sensitization tests raises ethical considerations, in particular
concerning the risk for the volunteers, especially the risk that a patch test sensitization elicits a
clinical disease in the subject.
In the literature, there is no answer on the consequences of such testing on human
volunteers. A request of information about the risk involved was sent to COLIPA in December
1998. The answer dated March 22, 1999 gave the following information provided by member
companies:
l Dermatological testing to confirm skin compatibility is common practice; data on
470,000 human volunteers covering 2000 products did not reveal any positive results
identified as due to sensitization.
l Reported data covering HRIPT tests carried out during the last 10 years and related to
2044 different products tested on a total of 136,765 persons showed 123 cases of
probable/confirmed sensitizations.
In conclusion, a risk for human volunteers cannot be excluded. There is still a lack of
information on the severity and frequency of adverse effects.
Minimal Requirements for Human Testing for Other Purposes
One or more clear hypotheses should be stated in the study protocol. As a result of the study,
these hypotheses will be refuted or accepted. Only a clear a priori statement of hypotheses will
allow the choice of an appropriate study design, an appropriate study sample, and choice of
the appropriate statistical methods.
Study Design
The design of skin compatibility studies depends on the study problem investigated. Many
study designs have been described and successfully used in the past, even though there are
no protocols standardized and validated according to strict criteria. The study design will
depend on
l kind of cosmetic ingredient or mixture of ingredients tested;
l anticipated use of the ingredient or mixture of ingredients in cosmetic finished
products; and
l kind of skin compatibility problem to be assessed (e.g., immediate or delayed effects,
acute or cumulative effect).
All valid study designs for compatibility studies have to include negative and positive
controls and the vehicle (blank). The scientific criteria for the choice of the study design should
be clearly stated in the protocol.
REFERENCES
1. White IR, De Groot AC. Cosmetics and skin care products. In: Frosch PJ, Menne T, Lepoittevin JP, eds.
Contact Dermatitis. 4thed. New York: Springer, 2006:493–506.
2. Nielsen NH, Menne´ T. Contact sensitivity to cosmetics in an unselected Danish population. The
Glostrup allergy study, Denmark. Ann Dermatol Venereol 1993; 120:33–36.
General Concepts of Ethics in Human Testing
817

=== Page 835 ===
3. Basketter D, Kimber I. Predictive tests for irritants and allergens. In: Frosch PJ, Menne T, Lepoittevin
JP, eds. Contact Dermatitis. 4th ed. New York: Springer, 2006:179–187.
4. Kligman AM. Assessment of mild irritants in humans. In: Drill VA, Lazar P, eds. Current Concepts of
Cutaneous Toxicity. New York: Academic Press, 1980:69–94.
5. Research on healthy volunteers: a report of the Royal College of Physicians. J R Coll Physicians Lond
1986; 20:3–17.
6. Notes of Guidance for testing cosmetic ingredients for their safety evaluation. SCCP. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/04_sccp/docs/sccp_o_03j.pdf.
7. Basic criteria of the protocols for skin compatibility testing of potentially cutaneous irritant cosmetic
ingredients or mixtures of ingredients on human volunteers. SCCNFP 0245/99. Available at: http://
europa.eu.int/comm/food/fs/sc/sccp/out101_en.pdf.
8. Opinion concerning guidelines on the use of human volunteers in compatibility testing of finished
cosmetic products. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/sccp/documents/
out101_en.pdf.
9. Balls M, Goldberg AM, Fentem JH, et al. The three Rs: the way forward. ATLA 1995; 23:884–886.
10. Opinion concerning the predictive testing of potentially cutaneous sensitizing cosmetic ingredients
or mixtures of ingredients. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/sccp/
docshtml/sccp_out102_en.htm.
818
Andersen

=== Page 836 ===
76
Values and Limitations of Bioengineering
Measurements
Peter Clarys and Andre´ O. Barel
Faculteit Lichamelijke Opvoeding en Kinesitherapie, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
In the dermato-cosmetic world, evaluation of the skin looks at first glance rather easy since the
skin is very accessible for clinical evaluation (1,2). Visual examination reveals color, dryness,
oiliness, roughness, ageing, etc. Tactile evaluation by feeling reveals also dryness and oiliness,
plus roughness, firmness, laxity, ageing, etc. Even olfactory examination can be carried out,
which reveals information on perspiration, microbial colonization, and antiperspiration. As an
example, human vision is a very sensitive sensory and neurophysiological process. Experience
shows that we have a high sensitivity and discriminative power at low intensities of
luminosity. Our color discriminative power is so high that 0.5% to 1% differences in color can
be easily detected. Our sensitivity at higher intensity of luminosity is much less present. On the
other side, this neurophysiological process is very limited, subjective, mostly qualitative,
highly observer dependent, and there is no precise memorization of color in function of time.
The sensitivity in the visible region is not constant in function of wavelength with a maximum
of sensitivity in the green color (490–550 nm). On the contrary, the use of tristumulus
reflectance colorimeters using the CIELAB L*a*b* color system, which is internationally
accepted, delivers a quantitative, accurate, and reproducible analysis of the skin color and can
be calibrated with standard color charts (3).
Morphological and histological informations about the different layers of the skin can be
obtained by the very invasive conventional biopsies that provide information of the full skin
layers down to the hypodermis (4). Skin biopsies could be envisaged in dermatology but for
ethical reasons are not acceptable in the cosmetic domain.
The development of novel, ingenious, noninvasive bioengineering measuring and
imaging devices as tools in the evaluation of the skin has known an enormous development
within these last years. They are used in clinical and fundamental dermato-cosmetic research.
The aim of bioengineering measurement strategies is also to fullfil the legal requirements
concerning safety and validation of claims, mainly with the ban of animal testing on finished
cosmetic products. Directive 93/35/EEC requires that evidence is provided to support efficacy
claims for marketed cosmetic products (5). Although the Directive does not specify how this
kind of information should be obtained, more and more efficacy claims are supported with
bioengineering measurements.
The advantage of bioengineering and imaging techniques is that almost all the aspects
and properties of the living skin and also the changes of the skin in health (ageing) or in
pathology (e.g., psoriasis) are now measurable and quantifiable based on objective techniques,
and this is done in a noninvasive way, with no pain or inconvenience caused to the subjects (1).
The noninvasive methods are by nature objective, quantitative, generally investigator indepen-
dent, and they can be calibrated and validated in vivo and/or in vitro on skin model systems.
About 20 years ago, Le´veˆque (one of the founders of the noninvasive bioengineering)
was already impressed by the availability of noninvasive devices (an estimation of about
20 different devices in 1989). Currently the number is probably far above 100 to 150. The
second edition of the Handbook of Non-Invasive methods and the Skin edited by Serup, Jemec, and
Grove was published in 2006 and counts more than 100 chapters devoted to bioengineering
measurements and methods (6).
Many of these instruments or techniques are nowadays commercially available (not
always at affordable cost) and adapted for routine measurements. However, some of the recent
devices are still experimental, developed by skillful engineers in research laboratories, and
sometimes requiring experienced scientific operators.
The aim of this chapter is to critically investigate not only the principle of bioengineering
methods and the advantages of testing with a bioengineering instrument but also their

=== Page 837 ===
limitations in applications. Problems concerning the standardization and validation will be
evoked using some specific examples such as in relation with hydration and mechanical
properties of the skin.
ADVANTAGES IN USING BIOENGINEERING INSTRUMENTS
The noninvasive methods are by nature objective, quantitative, generally investigator indepen-
dent, can be calibrated and validated, and they are also developed to work on human volunteers.
If bioengineering measurements are properly performed, under standardized conditions, then
they can lead to a harmonization of the obtained results and allow interlaboratory and
interobserver comparisons (7). Another important advantage of bioengineering measurements
is that some of them are able to detect subclinical effects not present visually. For example, the
detection of an abnormally high level of transepidermal water loss (TEWL) that can be correlated
with the appearance of skin irritation at a later stage (8,9).
STANDARDIZATION, CALIBRATION, AND VALIDATION OF THE INSTRUMENTS
Each bioengineering instrument delivers raw data, which become only valid through a
process of validation involving calibration and comparison with other methods or with
a reference method (2). This procedure of standardization, and calibration to validate the
technique and the performances, is necessary before starting a dermato-cosmetic study.
Serup (2) has defined and described some classical key terms regarding the performances
and validation of any instrument: accuracy, precision, range, repeatability, reproducibility,
sensitivity, etc. Each commercial instrument is in principle calibrated at the factory before
reaching the customer. Furthermore, the recalibration of the instrument should be performed
at regular intervals (ideally, if possible, before each set of measurements). It is strongly
advised that a laboratory should use the instruments according to precisely described
standard operating procedures (SOPs), which cover the calibration, validation, maintenance,
performance, and condition of the equipment used with all the details of the operation
procedure (10).
Most of the measurements on the skin are strongly influenced by variations in the
environmental conditions. Therefore the temperature and the relative humidity in the
experimental measuring room should be standardized and kept constant (11). The ambient air
temperature should be kept between 198C and 218C and the relative humidity at 40% to 45%.
The subjects should be acclimatized and conditioned in the standardized environmental
conditions for at least 20 minutes. The skin test sites should not be covered with any clothes
and exposed to the ambient air during this 20-minute period. The influence of seasonal
variations (winter and summer periods) needs to be taken into account when performing
longitudinal studies over many months. It is preferable to perform repeated measurements
within one season. Finally the problem of cleansing the skin or not before starting the
measurements on the skin must be considered (the presence of excess sebum could influence
the measurements). If preliminary cleansing is carried out, it must be done under standard
conditions and followed by sufficient acclimatization time for the skin to recover.
The elaboration of valid guidelines by independent and unbiased expert groups and the
publication of relevant and reproducible test results according to these guidelines, such as
those suggested by the European Group on Efficacy of Cosmetics (EEMCO) group (12–16),
should be encouraged for each type of technique to promote the recognition and acceptance of
specific bioengineering measurements.
DISADVANTAGES
In this paragraph, we will give an overview of some problems when investigating the skin
with noninvasive bioengineering methods.
Quoting Kligman: “A fool with a tool still remains a fool” (1); actually with the marvelous
development of bioengineering techniques, one should quote: “A fool with a marvelous array of
tools still remains a fool.”
820
Clarys and Barel

=== Page 838 ===
Single Limited Parameter
The noninvasive methods are by nature objective, quantitative, and generally investigator
independent, and they can be calibrated and validated but are narrow based on a single physical
modality of the propriety of the skin (2). As a consequence, each instrument is only able to detect
and measure one single parameter of a complex skin structure, which is not sufficient for providing
an overall clinical picture (7). For some investigations, it is necessary to combine two methods: the
efficacy of an occlusive hydration cream can be evaluated using hydration and TEWL.
Measuring Units
The bioengineering instruments furnish as results either real physical units or arbitrary units.
Physical units are easily correlated with a physical phenomenon. For example: thickness
of the dermis in millimeter; pressure applied in the suction method in millibar or Pascal,
sebum quantity secretion rate in mg/hr, electrical capacitance in microfarad, etc.
Unfortunately many devices deliver nonphysical arbitrary units, which are much more
difficult to correlate with a physical concept and to relate with other instruments. For example,
laser Doppler and arbitrary flux/velocimetry units proportional to the speed of and the
number of red blood cells. Comparing different instruments that deliver results expressed in
arbitrary units is complex.
Calibration
The problem is that each company uses its own way to calibrate the device with its own
proper standards. This procedure is not always transparent for the customers (sometimes the
calibration is proprietary). Actually for many measuring techniques there is no golden
universal standard, which can be used for standardization and validation for all instruments.
Ideally, such a golden standard could be a simple artificial skin model whose properties are
constant and known.
Claims Made by the Cosmetic Industry
When looking at the intensive advertisements and marketing done by the cosmetic industry,
the very promising claims remain rather vague and are very difficult to substantiate by
bioengineering methods. A few examples taken from the publicity in the cosmetic world: skin
looks younger, rejuvenation of your skin, skin radiance, reenergizing the skin, the skin is
invigorated, etc. How are we going to measure these claims? As an example, we will mention
here the problem of the frequently mentioned cosmetic claim—skin tone or skin radiance.
Skin tone or skin radiance is an expression often used by the cosmetic industry in their
publicity; more and more cosmetics are put on the market with the indication of skin radiance.
The complex radiance is a reality that everybody is aware of, but difficult to describe. The
evaluation of radiance is made by subjective visual observation either by the subjects
themselves or by the investigators. Skin tone is the mirror of general good health, reflects
emotional state (joy, sadness, stress, etc.), hormonal status (menopause), nutrition, fatigue, and
age, and is also influenced by environmental factors (smoking, drinking, weather, etc.).
Obviously we are faced with few objective criteria, and therefore a need exists for a
bioengineering optical method of in vivo evaluation of the cosmetic radiance efficacy (17).
Mechanical Measurements on the Skin
The elastic and viscoelastic properties of the skin can be evaluated with different commercial
devices: lateral torsion method (TorqueMeter1, Andover, U.K.) (18) and vertical suction
method (DermaLab1, BTC-20001, and Cutometer1) (19–24).
In the torsional method, the skin displacements in the horizontal plane can be small, and
this lateral torsional movement involves only the epidermis and dermis (25). In the suction
method, the mechanical stimulus is vertical to the skin surface. When applying a large probe
aperture (1–2 cm) and working with a high negative suction pressure (400–500 mbar), the
observed displacement involves epidermis, dermis, and may also include subcutaneous fat.
Only the Cutometer presents a complete range of aperture diameter (2–8 mm diameter).
With all instruments, two type of curves can be obtained (see Fig. 1): the strain versus
time curves, mode 1 (left, Fig. 1), which delivers elasticity, viscoelasticity, recovery parameters,
and the stress-strain curves, mode 2 (right, Fig. 1), which allows to calculate the Modulus of
Values and Limitations of Bioengineering Measurements
821

=== Page 839 ===
Young (firmness and stiffness). The Modulus of Young is normally not considered to be
appropriate for a complex multilayer structure such as the skin (20). Both in vitro and in vivo
uniaxial tension tests have shown that the amount of deformation grows steadily smaller so
that the course of progressive extension cannot be represented by a straight line, but by a curve
(Fig. 1, mode 2 in right side), (26). The calculation of Young’s Modulus is complex because the
skin shows a nonlinear stress-strain curve. However, this curve can be divided in three phases
with more or less two linear portions. The first linear phase corresponds to the initial extension
of the tissues at small loads, followed by the second linear phase corresponding to the stiffening
of the dermis with increasing extension (24). The Modulus of Young can be either computed from
the first linear phase (low stiffness) or from the second linear phase corresponding to higher
stiffness. Considering the strain versus time curves (Fig. 1, mode 1), we are faced with the
problem of the terminology of the different elastic and viscoelastic deformation parameters. A
standardization in the terminology of these deformation parameters is strongly recommended
(24,27). The development and further use of a universal in vitro calibration system using a simple
skin model system (soft silicone polymers with known Modulus of Young and known
viscoelastic properties) is strongly recommended in the future.
Hydration Measurements
Quantitative hydration evaluation of the upper layers of the skin, for example, horny layer and
upper epidermis are numerous: electrical impedance and capacitance measurements (28),
Fourier-transformed infrared spectroscopy with an attenuated total reflection unit, ATR-FTIR
(29), and confocal Raman microscopy (30). The last two instruments, although they give
quantitative data directly related to the amount of water present in the horny layer, are less
used in routine clinical research due to the high price of purchase. Most routine hydration
measurements are carried out using the electrical impedance/conductance properties:
Dermalab (31) and Skicon1 (Shizuoka-Ken, Japan) (32), impedance-based capacitive reactance:
DPM Nova1 (Portsmouth, U.S.A.) (33), or capacitance properties: Corneometer1 (Ko¨ln,
Germany) (34) and MoistureMeter1 (Kuopio, Finland) (35), of an alternating electric current
applied on the skin surface. It must be pointed out that the data of these instruments (electrical
units or arbitrary units) are related to hydration, but not linearly proportional to the percentage
of water present in the horny layer (28). Again, in vitro calibration can be carried out using
simple model systems, such as cellulose filters impregnated with aqueous solutions and
solutions of known dielectric or impedance properties.
Sensitive Skin
Despite the numerous different bioengineering instruments that are available and skin
properties investigated, some dermato-cosmetic properties of the skin remain difficult to
quantify. As an example, we would like to mention the concept of sensitive skin. The diagnosis
of sensitive skin is defined by neurosensory hyperreactivity of the skin, and is essentially based
on self-perceived sensations of people who report facial skin discomfort as stinging, burning,
Figure 1
Strain-time curves (mode 1, left) and stress-strain curves (mode 2, right).
822
Clarys and Barel

=== Page 840 ===
and itching when their skin is exposed to some environmental factors (wind, sun, and
pollution) or after application of topical products (hard water, soap, and cosmetics) (36).
Epidemiological studies performed on large populations have shown that about 50% of
women declare that they have self-perceived sensitive skin. Furthermore, the subjects with
sensitive skin give a positive response profile, which is highly characteristic of a standardized
Sensitive Skin Questionnaire. It appears from the literature that with the classical routine
bioengineering devices it is very difficult to detect the presence of sensitive skin in subjects.
Hydration, TEWL, and skin color are poorly correlated with sensitive skin (37). Only a very
sophisticated device such as functional magnetic resonance imaging is capable to detect in the
brain cortex specific sites involved with sensitive skin (36).
CONCLUSIONS
It is now obvious that noninvasive techniques have proven to be valuable tools for measuring
objectively and quantitatively the biophysical and histological properties of the human skin;
actually they are used more and more widely in dermatological departments for clinical
diagnosis and therapy, and in pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries for safety and efficacy
testing of topically applied product (38). Furthermore, bioengineering methods are becoming so
sensitive that they are capable in well-designed cosmetic studies to show significant effects of
topical products on the skin—effects that are not perceived by the consumers themselves. The
noninvasive technology is harmless to the human volunteers and causes almost no discomfort.
The eventual risks of bioengineering methods are concerning the substances applied on the skin:
these topical ingredients could provoke irritant or allergic reactions. Most bioengineering
instruments are commercially available at affordable cost. In addition, some of the recent devices
are still experimental, developed by skillful engineers in research laboratories, and sometimes
requiring experienced scientific operators. However, it is important to consider the limitations of
the instruments used in bioengineering technology. These measurements are validated only if
they are carried out under standardized conditions, if the devices have been calibrated, and if a
certain number of precautions have been taken in account so that investigators in widely
separated countries can obtain reproducible results and come to similar conclusions (1).
REFERENCES
1. Kligman AM. Personal perspectives on bioengineering and the skin: the successful past and the
brilliant future. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds. Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the
Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006:3–7.
2. Serup J. How to choose and use non-invasive methods. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds.
Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006:9–13.
3. Westerhof W. Colorimetry. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds. Handbook of Non-Invasive
Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006:635–647.
4. Corcuff P, Pie´rard GE. Skin imaging: state of the art at the dawn of the year 2000. In: Elsner P, Barel
AO, Berardesca E, Gabard B, Serup J, eds. Skin Bioengineering, Techniques and Appliations in
Dermatology and Cosmetology. Switzerland, Basel: Karger, 1998:1–11.
5. Council Directive 93/35/EEC amending for the sixth time Directive 76/68/EEC on the approxima-
tion of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetics products. Off J Eur Communities 1993;
L151:32–35.
6. Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Serup J, Jemec GBR, Grove GL, eds. Boca
Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006.
7. Zuang V. Physical measurements for the predictive evaluation of the tolerability of skin poducts. In:
Elsner P, Barel AO, Berardesca E, Gabard B, Serup J, eds. Skin Bioengineering, Techniques and
Appliations in Dermatology and Cosmetology. Basel, Switzerland: Karger, 1998:235–243.
8. Berardesca E, Distante F. The modulation of skin irritation. Contact Dermat 1994; 31:281–287.
9. Serup J. The spectrum of irritancy and application of bioengineering techniques in irritant dermatitis.
In: Elsner P, Maibach HI, eds. Current Problems in Dermatology. New Clinical and Experimental
Aspects. Vol. 23. Basel: Karger 1995:131–143.
10. Wilhelm KP, Hofmann J. Implementation of a quality management system in a contract laboratory
working with non-invasive methods. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds. Handbook of Non-
Invasive Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006:67–72.
Values and Limitations of Bioengineering Measurements
823

=== Page 841 ===
11. Zuang V, Berardesca E. Designing and performing clinical studies with bioengineering techniques. In:
Elsner P, Barel AO, Berardesca E, Gabard B, Serup J, eds. Skin Bioengineering, Techniques and
Applications in Dermatology and Cosmetology. Basel, Switzerland: Karger, 1998:209–216.
12. Berardesca E. EEMCO guidance for the assessment of stratum corneum hydration: electrical methods.
Skin Res Technol 1997; 3:126–132.
13. Pie´rard GE. EEMCO guidance for the assessment of skin colour. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 1998;
10:1–11.
14. Pie´rard GE. EEMCO guidance to the in vivo assessment of tensile functional properties of the skin.
Part 1: relevance to the structures and ageing of the skin and subcutaneous tissues. Skin Pharmacol
Appl Skin Physiol 1999; 12:352–362.
15. Rodrigues L. EEMCO guidance to the in vivo assessment of tensile functional properties of the skin.
Part 2: instrumentation and test modes. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2001; 14:52–67.
16. Berardesca E, Le´veˆque JL, Masson P. EEMCO guidance for the measurement of skin microcirculation.
Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 2002; 15:442–450.
17. Petitjean A, Sainthilier JM, Mac-Mary S, et al. Skin radiance: how to quantify? Validation of an optical
method. Skin Res Technol 2007; 13:2–8.
18. Dermal Torque Meter1 [package insert]. Diastron Ltd., U.K.
19. DermaLab1 [package insert]. SermaLab, Elasticity Module, Cortex, Hadsund, Denmark, 2008.
20. Grove GL, Damia J, Grove MJ, et al. Suction chamber method for measuring of skin mechanics: the
dermalab. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds. Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin.
2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006:593–599.
21. BTC-20001 [package insert]. Surgical Research Laboratory, Nashville, U.S.A., 2008.
22. Smalls LK, Wickett RR, Vischer MO. Effect of dermal thickness, tissue composition and body site on
skin biomechanical properties. Skin Res Technol 2006; 12:43–49.
23. Cutometer1 [package insert]. Courage-Khazaka, Ko¨ln, Germany, 2008.
24. Barel AO, Courage W, Clarys P. Suction chamber method for measuring of skin mechanics: the new
digital version of the cutometer. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds. Handbook of Non-Invasive
Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006:583–591.
25. Agache PG. Twistometry measurement of skin elasticity. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds.
Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006:
601–611.
26. Barbenel JC. Identification of Langer’s lines. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds. Handbook of Non-
Invasive Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006:565–569.
27. Escoffier C, de Rigal J, Rochefort A, et al. Age-related mechanical properties of human skin: an in vivo
study. J Invest Dermatol 1989; 93:353–365.
28. Gabard B, Clarys P, Barel AO. Comparison of commercial electrical measurement instruments
for assessing the hydration state of the stratum corneum. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, Grove G, eds.
Handbook of Non-Invasive Methods and the Skin. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2006: 3541–358.
29. Lucassen JAJ, Van Geen GNA, Jansen JAS. Fourier-transformed (FT) infrared spectroscopy of the skin
using an attenuated total reflection (ATR) unit. J Biomed Optics 1998; 3:267–280.
30. Van Der Pol A, Caspers PJ. Confocal raman spectroscopy for in vivo skin hydration measurements.
In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology. 3rd ed.
New York: Informa, 2009.
31. Dermalab1 [package insert]. Elasticity Module, Cortex, Hadsund, Denmark, 2008.
32. Skicon1 [package insert]. IBS, Shizuoka-Ken, Japan, 2008.
33. Dermal Phase Meter, DPM1 [package insert]. Nova, Portsmouth, U.S.A., 2008.
34. Corneometer1 [package insert]. Courage-Khazaka, Ko¨ln, Germany, 2008.
35. MoistureMeter1 [package insert]. Delfin, Kuopio, Finland, 2008.
36. Querleux B, de LaCHarrie`re O. Neurophysiology of self-perceived sensitive-skin subjects by functional
magnetic resonance imaging. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science
and Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
37. Pelosi A, Berardesca E. Tests for sensitive skin. In: Barel AO, Paye M, Maibach HI, eds. Handbook of
Cosmetic Science and Technology. 3rd ed. New York: Informa, 2009.
38. Elsner P, Barel AO, Berardesca E, et al. Preface. In: Elsner P, Barel AO, Berardesca E, Gabard B,
Serup J, eds. Skin Bioengineering, Techniques and Appliations in Dermatology and Cosmetology.
Switzerland: Karger Basel, 1998:VIII–IX.
824
Clarys and Barel

=== Page 842 ===
77
The Current Regulatory Context in the
European Union
Marleen Pauwels and Vera Rogiers
Department of Toxicology, Dermato-Cosmetology and Pharmacognosy,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
INTRODUCTION
Directive (Dir.) 76/768/EEC relating to cosmetic products (1) is a vertical legislation and every
cosmetic product placed on the European market must fulfil its requirements. It would,
however, be quite unrealistic to assume that this is a stand-alone piece of legislation that is not
affected by other legal texts. In practice, Dir. 76/768/EEC forms part of a complex legislative
process that was initiated more than 40 years ago to guarantee the free movement of goods
within Europe while simultaneously ensuring the safety of the European citizens and their
environment.
The current chapter provides an overview of the most relevant features of the Cosmetic
Products Directive, after which the milestones depicted in Figure 1 are individually discussed
in the light of their relevance to the cosmetic regulatory framework.
THE COSMETIC PRODUCTS DIRECTIVE
Definition of a Cosmetic Product
According to the European Commission Dir. 93/35/EEC, [Article 1], a cosmetic product is
defined as any substance or preparation intended to be placed in contact with the various parts of the
human body (epidermis, hair system, nails, lips and external genital organs) or with the teeth and the
mucous membranes of the oral cavity with a view exclusively or mainly to cleaning them, perfuming
them, changing their appearance and/or correcting body odours and/or protecting them or keeping them
in good condition (2). This definition gives an indication on the target site of application of a
cosmetic product and on its allowed functions (3). Thus, products such as skin creams, lotions,
perfumes, lipsticks, fingernail polishes, eye and facial makeup preparations, soap products,
shampoos, permanent waves, hair colors, toothpastes, and deodorants fall under the category
of cosmetic products in the European Union (EU). More questionable product types such as
suntanning preparations, antiperspirants, and antidandruff shampoos are also considered
cosmetics within Europe, whereas this may differ in other parts of the world (4).
The Safety Prerequisite and Responsibilities
The current EU legislation on cosmetics literally states that a cosmetic product put on the market
within the Community must not cause damage to human health when applied under normal or
reasonably foreseeable conditions of use, taking account, in particular, of the product’s presentation, its
labelling, any instructions for its use and disposal as well as any other indication or information
provided by the manufacturer or his authorised agent or by any other person responsible for placing the
product on the Community market [Art.2]. The responsibility to ensure that cosmetic products are
safe for consumer use is placed upon the manufacturer or his authorized agent or by any other
person responsible for placing the product on the community market (2).
A qualified safety assessor, holding a specified diploma (5) in the field of pharmacy,
toxicology, dermatology, medicine, or a similar discipline, undersigns the safety assessment of
the cosmetic product under consideration and thus takes responsibility for the safety of the
product when applied under reasonably foreseeable conditions of use.
By means of a post-marketing surveillance system the EU member states are on their turn
expected to take all necessary measures to ensure that only cosmetic products that conform to
the provisions of Dir. 76/768/EEC and its Annexes may be placed on the European market
[Art.3] (2). Nevertheless, the ultimate responsibility for the safety of a cosmetic product resides
with industry.

=== Page 843 ===
The Public Information Prerequisite
To optimally inform the consumer, every cosmetic product sold in the EU must contain the
following information on its label [Art.6]:
1.
name and address of the manufacturer or the responsible person for placing the
product on the market within the EU;
2.
nominal content of the finished product at the time of packaging (weight or volume);
3.
date of minimal durability (products with a minimum durability less than 30 months)
or an indication of the period of time after opening for which the product can be used
without any harm to the consumer;
4.
particular precautions to be observed in use, especially those indicated in the
Annexes to Dir. 76/768/EEC;
5.
batch number, enabling identification of manufacturing;
6.
function of the product, unless evident;
7.
a list of ingredients in INCI (International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients) in
descending order of weight at the time they were added, unless they are present at a
concentration below 1%, in which case they may be mentioned in any chosen order.
Moreover, the qualitative and quantitative composition of the cosmetic and the existing
data on undesirable effects on human health resulting from use of the cosmetic product are
enforced to be made easily accessible to the public by any appropriate means, including
electronic means. Whereas the qualitative composition already features on the label (ingredient
list mandatory), the quantitative composition is limited to “dangerous substances” according
to Dir. 67/548/EEC (see section “Horizontal Provisions for the Protection of Animals”).
The “Technical Information File” Prerequisite
For cosmetic products, the EU legislation does not foresee an extensive premarketing
notification/authorization procedure involving a full toxicological dossier on the ingredients
and the finished cosmetic product. Instead, the EU member states are charged with the
Figure 1
Overview of the major milestones
in the EU chemical-related legislative process.
Abbreviation: EU, European Union.
826
Pauwels and Rogiers

=== Page 844 ===
installation of a post-marketing surveillance system to check industry’s compliance with the
provisions of the Cosmetic Products Directive.
To this respect, Art.7a of the Cosmetic Products Directive imposes that the following
information should be readily accessible to the member states’ competent authorities (2,6):
1.
Qualitative and quantitative composition of the product;
2.
Physicochemistry, microbiology, and purity of the ingredients and the cosmetic
product;
3.
Manufacturing method;
4.
Safety assessment of the finished cosmetic product;
5.
Name and address of the safety assessor;
6.
Existing data on undesirable effects on human health;
7.
Proof of the effects claimed;
8.
Data on animal testing.
The compilation of points (1) to (8) is commonly referred to as a cosmetic’s technical
information file (TIF) or product information requirement (PIR).
The Annexes to the Cosmetics Directive and the SCC(NF)P
Like the majority of EU Directives, Dir. 76/768/EEC is composed of the classical set of articles
(definitions, responsibilities of the EU member states, safeguard clause, etc.), followed by a
number of technical annexes. Five of them consist of ingredient lists:
Annex II:
list of forbidden substances in cosmetic products;
Annex III:
list of substances, which are not allowed to be used in cosmetic products outside
the restrictions and conditions laid down;
Annexes IV, VI, and VII:
lists of allowed colorants, preservatives, and UV filters, respectively,
accompanied by their maximum levels and/or conditions of use in cosmetic products.
The content of these Annexes is regularly updated through amendments or adaptations
to technical progress of the Cosmetics Directive. The cosmetic legislation charges the EU
member states with the designation of a competent authority responsible for checking that
every cosmetic product’s composition complies with the provisions laid down in the above
Annexes [Art.4] (2).
For the safety assessment of the ingredients appearing on the Annexes, the Commission
is assisted by the Scientific Committee on Consumer Products (SCCP), previously called the
Scientific Committee on Cosmetic Products and Non-Food Products intended (SCCNFP) for
consumers. The SCCP forms part of DG SANCOa and owns the official mandate to provide
opinions on questions concerning the safety of consumer products (nonfood products intended
for the consumer). It is composed of independent scientists in the field of medicine, toxicology,
pharmacy, dermatology, biology, chemistry, and other disciplines, collectively covering a wide
range of expertize for this multidisciplinary committee (7). Together with the Scientific
Committee on Health and Environmental Risks (SCHER) and the Scientific Committee on
Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR), the SCCP provides the Commission
with sound scientific advice needed when preparing policy and proposals relating to
consumer safety, public health, and the environment. In addition, the Inter-Committee
Coordination Group (ICCG), consisting of the chairs and vice-chairs of SCCP, SCHER, and
SCENIHR, warrants harmonization of risk assessment and deals with questions, which are
common to more than one committee, diverging scientific opinions and exchange of
information on the activities of the three committees.b
In the EU, the safety of cosmetic ingredients is guaranteed by two operative channels,
namely (8):
1.
The safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients to be taken up in the Directive’s
Annexes II, III, IV, VI, or VII, evaluated by the SCC(NF)P, and benefiting from an
aDirectorate-General Health and Consumer Protection.
bhttp://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/committees_en.htm. Accessed February 2008.
The Current Regulatory Context in the European Union
827

=== Page 845 ===
extended physicochemical and toxicological data package as set out in the SCCP
Notes of Guidance (7).
2.
The safety evaluation of all ingredients present in finished cosmetic products is
included in the product’s TIF and carried out by a qualified safety assessor.
Since for substances not taken up in one of the Annexes to Dir. 76/768/EEC (1), no specific
additional data requirements apply, the availability of data depends on data requirements and
data accessibility measures laid down in the other legislation(s), with which these substances
have to comply.
The SCCP specifically addresses questions in relation to the safety and allergenic
properties of cosmetic products and ingredients with respect to their impact on consumer
health, toys, textiles, clothing, personal care products, domestic products such as detergents,
and consumer services such as tattooing (7,9). In this context, the committee also performs full
risk assessments for candidate ingredients to be included in the Annexes to the Cosmetic
Products Directive. The SCCP is not responsible for the safety assessment of cosmetic
ingredients not taken up in the Annexes to the Cosmetic Products Directive (7).
Since 1997, the opinions of the SCCP and SCCNFP are made publicly available through
the Committees’ Web sites.c
The Animal Testing Ban for Cosmetics and Their Ingredients
Since the cosmetic field is often seen as a luxury area, posing no health benefits, being
innocuous, and not needing any innovation, it turned out to be a fruitful battlefield for animal
protection organizations, politicians, and parliament lobbyists to introduce an animal testing
ban. Although, it was clear from the start that only a limited number of animals could be saved
by banning animal tests for the safety of cosmetics and their ingredients (10), the “cosmetics
case” became a remarkable example of how to introduce alternative methods into legislation in
a politically driven and not scientifically driven way. The Sixth Amendment to the Cosmetic
Products Directive for the first time introduced the concept of an animal testing ban on
cosmetics and their ingredients. More specifically its Art.4 (1) stated that cosmetic products
should not contain ingredients or combinations of ingredients tested on animals after 1 January 1998
in order to meet the requirements of this Directive. This statement was somewhat mitigated by the
provision that if there has been insufficient progress in developing satisfactory methods to replace
animal testing, . . ., the Commission shall, by 1 January 1997, submit draft measures to postpone the
date of implementation of this provision, for a sufficient period, and in any case for no less than two
years, . . . (2). The mentioned date of implementation was postponed twice (11,12).
Nevertheless, as a result of the limited progress in alternative method development and
with the clear aim of pursuing the abolishment of animal testing for cosmetic products, the
Seventh Amendment (6) to Dir. 76/768/EEC introduced explicit marketing and testing ban
provisions for cosmetic products and their ingredients. More specifically, from 11 September,
2004, onward, animal experiments with finished cosmetic products are subject to an absolute
ban, whereas a testing ban on ingredients or combinations of ingredients applies step by step
as soon as alternative methods are validated and adopted, but with a maximum cutoff date of
11 March, 2009, irrespective of the availability of alternative nonanimal tests.
In addition, a marketing ban applies step by step as soon as alternative methods are
validated and adopted in the EU legislation. This marketing ban will be introduced at the latest
on 11 March, 2009, for all human health effects with the exception of repeated-dose toxicity,
reproductive toxicity, and toxicokinetics. For these specific health effects, the deadline of
11 March, 2013, is put forward, irrespective of the availability of alternative nonanimal tests.
Proposal for a Recast of the Cosmetic Products Directive
Quite recently, the European Commission published a proposal for a regulation on
cosmetic products (13), the so-called recast of the 32 year-old Cosmetic Products Directive
(1). This recast is meant to bring together the original directive with all its amendments,
simultaneously introducing some substantive changes to the individual texts when
chttp://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/sccp/sccp_opinions_en.htm, http://ec.europa.eu/health/
ph_risk/committees/04_sccp/sccp_opinions_en.htm, and http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/
sccp/sccp_opinions_en.htm. Accessed February 2008.
828
Pauwels and Rogiers

=== Page 846 ===
incorporated. Since the recast is at the Commission proposal stage, it requires extensive
discussions between the member states and within the European Parliament, implying that
it will not remain unchanged. Nevertheless, it is useful to provide an overview of the major
changes that are currently introduced. It should, however, be noted that the list below is
not exhaustive and that it cannot be foreseen which of the provisions will actually be taken
up in the final version of the regulation.
Moving from a Directive to a Regulation
One of the main goals for the recast being simplification of the administrative procedures
related to the Cosmetic Products Directive, the text proposed aims at becoming a “regulation
on cosmetics.” European regulations have the advantage that they are binding in their entirety
and are directly applicable in all member states, whereas directives need to be transposed into
the national legal frameworks of the individual member states. With the 27 member states
Europe currently counts, regulations automatically represent a major administrative simpli-
fication for the member states.
The articles of the original directive have been reorganized into chapters displayed in a
logical order.
Introduction of a Set of Definitions
The recast aims at clarifying a number of issues for which legal uncertainty exists. Therefore,
definitions for terms such as “manufacturer,” “importer,” “placing on the market,” “making
available on the market,” “harmonised standard,” “traces,” “preservatives,” “colourants,” “UV
filters,” “(serious) undesirable effect,” “repeal,” and “withdrawal” are introduced in Art. 2,
and some definitions of different cosmetic product types, such as “rinse-off product,” “leave-
on product,” “hair product,” “skin product,” etc., are included in a preamble to Annexes II to
VI. This preamble would replace the original Annex I to the Cosmetic Products Directive (1),
which contains a non-exhaustive list of possible cosmetic product types.
One Single European Notification and a Strengthened Market Control
The proposed recast introduces a single centralized electronic notification of certain
information concerning the product placed on the market. Instead of having to notify in
every individual member state and needing to comply with all the national provisions (e.g.,
communication to poison control centres), the recast now foresees one single notification and
one single poison control communication at the European level.
The member states are responsible for in-market control and in case of noncompliance,
some specific possibilities for actions to be taken are mentioned in the recast (e.g., the
introduction of penalties).
New Provisions for CMR Substances
Substances classified as carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction (CMR) category 1 or 2
according to the principles of Dir. 67/548/EEC (14) are actually prohibited for use in cosmetic
products (6). The basic principle would remain unchanged, but the recast opens more
possibilities in the sense that there should be a possibility, in the exceptional case where these
substances are legally used in food and no suitable alternative substances exist, to use such substances in
cosmetic products if such use has been found safe by the SCCP.
Introduction of Harmonized Standards
Throughout the text, reference is made to the use of harmonized standards. This implies that
the Commission considers further development of European standards for analytical methods,
claim substantiation, etc., enabling insurance of product compliance in these fields.
Clarifications on the Safety Assessment of Cosmetic Products
The TIF or PI(F) would be called the “cosmetic safety report.” A newly created Annex I to the
regulation would contain some guidance on the content of this report. A responsible person
ensuring that the cosmetic safety report is kept up to date is to be designated.
The qualifications of the safety assessor are specified within the text and allow safety
assessors also from outside Europe to sign the cosmetic product safety assessment.
The Current Regulatory Context in the European Union
829

=== Page 847 ===
“INCI” Becomes “Name of Common Ingredients Glossary”
The recast replaces the original INCId list by the so-called common ingredients glossary.
This glossary is described to contain the names of relevant cosmetic ingredients (~10.000),
but not to constitute a list of authorized cosmetic ingredients. This is the same definition as
was given for the INCI list, meaning that only the name has changed.
However, it must be emphasized that this new regulation on cosmetics is in a
preliminary stage. It still needs to be discussed by the EU member states and the European
Parliament, meaning that some adaptations are expected. This brings the possibility of a final
version beyond 2009. The only certainty seems to be that all statements related to the animal
testing ban as mentioned in the current cosmetic legislation (6) are precluded to be changed.
RELEVANT “VERTICAL” EU LEGISLATIONS
In parallel to the Cosmetic Products Directive, some other important legal milestones deal with
the protection of human health with respect to specific types of substances. These so-called
“vertical” legislations are depicted in Figure 2.
Although they all appear to function independently from the cosmetic legislation, there
are some chemicals, which are regulated by more than one directive. Because of these
intersections between the Cosmetic Products Directive and other vertical legislations, the
following points address the relevance of each of them. Previously, we placed it in the light of
data generation through the provisions of the above directives/regulations (8). Here, we focus
on the existing intersections with the cosmetic field.
The Dangerous Substances Directive and REACH
Over the past four decades, chemical substances have been regulated at the European level by
Dir. 67/548/EEC (14), its amendments and adaptations to technical progress. In first instance,
this chemical legislation covers the listing and review of existing substances in the EU, together
with the notification of new chemicals. Basically, a new chemical substance could only be
produced within or imported into the EU after having received a favorable judgment from
the EU member state’s competent authority to which a full notification dossier has been
addressed.
dInternational Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients.
Figure 2
Schematic presentation of “vertical” cosmetic-related legislations in the EU. Abbreviation: EU,
European Union.
830
Pauwels and Rogiers

=== Page 848 ===
In a second stage, the Dangerous Substances Directive covered the rules for classification
and labelling of chemical substances in the EU. This means that not only test descriptions for
physicochemical (Annex V, Part A), toxicological (Annex V, Part B), and ecotoxicological
(Annex V, Part C) studies were provided, but also some explicit rules to translate the results
from physicochemical and/or (eco)toxicological studies into a classification involving
appropriate risk and safety phrases to be mentioned on the label (Annex VI). The classification
and labelling principles of Dir. 67/548/EEC are still referred to in many other EU legislative
texts.
The recently published EU Regulation No.1907/2006 (15) concerning the registration,
evaluation, authorisation, and restriction of chemicals, commonly referred to as “REACH,”
introduces some major changes in the EU regulatory framework for chemicals, some of which
are as follows:
1.
The reversal of the burden of proof: Manufacturers and/or importers become fully
responsible for proving and ensuring that their substances are safe for use, whereas
previously the member states’ competent authorities equally expressed an approval
for the safe use of the substance under consideration [Recitals 18,25,29, Art.4] (15).
2.
The creation of a European Chemicals Agency (EChA), established for the purpose of
managing and in some cases carrying out the technical, scientific, and administrative
aspects of REACH and to ensure consistency at community level in relation to these
aspects [Art.75] (15).
3.
Protection of experimental animals: REACH intends to reduce testing on vertebrate
animals as much as possible by imposing data sharing, prohibiting duplication of
animal testing, and the promotion of 3Re-alternative methods [Recitals
1,33,36,40,47,49, Art.13(2),15,25,26(3),27, Annex VI(1.4)]. Moreover, for the highest
tonnage levels (>100 tonnes/yr), testing proposals need to be officially approved
before the animal experiments are initiated [Recital 64, Art.22(1h),40] (15).
4.
“PBT,” “vPvB,” and “CMR” substances and the substitution principle: REACH
describes specific procedures as well for environmentally persistent, bioaccumula-
tive, and toxic (PBT) and very persistent and very bioaccumulative (vPvB)
substances, as for CMR substances [Art.14(4),40(1),58(3)]. Moreover, every applica-
tion for authorization for such a substance must include an analysis of possible
substitute substances or procedures as well as an analysis of their technical and
economic feasibility [Recitals 12,70,72, Art.55] (15).
5.
Enforcement of restrictions: Prohibitions on substances or restrictions on certain uses
were previously imposed through Dir.76/769/EEC (16), its amendments, and
numerous adaptations to technical progress. They will now be taken up by REACH
through a faster and simplified procedure [Recitals 23,80,84,85, Art.68] (15).
6.
The flow of information up and down the supply chain: Suppliers of a substance or a
preparation must provide to their customers a safety data sheet including information
about any potential hazard in detailed exposure scenarios. To enable suppliers to draw
up correct exposure scenarios, downstream users will need to ensure a good upstream
communication on potential usage patterns [Recital 56, Art.31,32,36,37] (15).
Although most cosmetic ingredients by definition are chemicals (17), they are exempted from
the classification, packaging, and labelling provisions of the Dangerous Substances
legislation and REACH. Nevertheless, good knowledge on these legal texts significantly
helps to estimate data availability for a cosmetic ingredient (8) and to know its legal status as
a chemical in the EU.
The Dangerous Preparations Directive
As early as 1973 and 1977, solvents, paints, varnishes, printing inks, adhesives, and similar
products were identified as requiring special attention, and thus rules on these categories of
preparations were laid down (18,19). However, divergences in national legislations on the
remaining types of preparations still constituted a significant barrier to trade within the EU
and led to the publication of an overall Dangerous Preparations Directive (20,21).
eRefinement, Reduction and Replacement.
The Current Regulatory Context in the European Union
831

=== Page 849 ===
Since “preparations” are defined as mixtures or solutions composed of one or more substances
(21), numerous cosmetic ingredients fall under this category. Therefore, especially in
negotiations with raw material suppliers, the cosmetic manufacturer benefits from a good
understanding of the Dangerous Preparations Directive and its testing, classification, labelling,
and confidentiality rules and provisions (8).
EU Legislation on Food Additives
Since food additives are intended to be ingested, this type of chemicals calls for a separate set
of legal provisions and a risk assessment procedure. In Europe, food additives are regulated
through a number of complementary directives (22–25) based upon the common principle that
only those additives that are explicitly authorized and taken up in the official EU positive lists
may be used and only subject to the specific restrictions laid down. In 2002, after a number of
serious food crises in Europe (bovine spongiform encephalopathy, dioxins, and acrylamide),
the general principles and requirements of food law were translated into a new regulation (26).
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) was established to produce scientific opinions
and advice for drawing European policies and legislation (inter alia the adaptations to the
positive lists) and to support the European Commission, European Parliament, and EU
member states in taking effective and timely risk management decisions with regard to food
and food additives.
Since some cosmetic ingredients, such as flavoring and coloring agents, have also been
accepted as food additives in the EU, their legal status in that field is useful to consult. In case
the ingredients were found safe in the human food sector for daily ingestion, they usually
make ideal candidates to be used in cosmetic products at comparable exposure levels (8).
The Biocidal Products Directive
Since biocidal active substances are intended to kill living organisms, they need to be
accurately classified, labelled, and controlled to inform and protect the professional user and/
or the general public. Therefore, the Biocidal Products Directive (27) deals with data
requirements and risk assessments of active substances and ready-to-use end products.
Herein, the classification and labelling provisions of the Dangerous Chemicals and
Preparations Directives are taken over.
The intersection between the biocidal and cosmetic world mainly consists of
preservatives used in cosmetics, which makes knowledge on the provisions of Dir. 98/8/
EEC (27) relevant for that particular type of cosmetic ingredients (8).
The Medicinal Products Directive
The first version of a directive regulating the marketing of medicinal products in the EU was
issued in 1965 (28). It has been repeatedly adapted and has been finally replaced by its current
version in 2001 (29). The combination of the uncontested benefit and social value of medicines
on the one hand and their potential side effects on the other hand leads to the necessity of
extensive regulatory requirements.
However, in the EU, the use of medicinal active substances in cosmetics is strongly
discouraged. A number of exceptions exist, but as a general rule, the intersection between
active medicinal substances and ingredients allowed in cosmetics is kept very restricted (8).
The EU Legislation on Detergents
The legislation on detergents has been amended on several occasions until it was published in
its final form in 2004 (30). Its focus resides on environmental aspects, viewing the chemical
nature (many are anionic surfactants) of the substances concerned.
Cleansing cosmetic products typically contain different kinds of surfactants, which also
form part of detergents. Therefore some knowledge on the detergents legislation may be of
use, although to a more restricted level (8).
The Plant Protection Directive and the Legislation on Medical Devices
The EU Plant Protection Products Directive (31) and the Medical Devices Legislation (32,33) are
taken up to complete the list, but are of inferior relevance for the cosmetic world. The intersection
between cosmetic ingredients and chemicals involved in both fields is indeed very limited (8).
832
Pauwels and Rogiers

=== Page 850 ===
RELEVANT “HORIZONTAL” EU LEGISLATIONS
Besides the discussed “vertical legislations” coexisting in the EU, some horizontal directives
also affect the regulatory background for cosmetics (as visualized in Fig. 3). In most cases, they
are complementary to the Cosmetic Products Directive, but sometimes their provisions
overrule the cosmetic legislation wherefore they certainly deserve to be mentioned.
Horizontal Provisions for the Protection of Animals
A directive commonly referred to by other pieces of legislation is Dir.86/609/EEC on the
protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes (34). Seeking to
improve the controls on the use of laboratory animals in nearly all sectors, Dir. 86/609/EEC
sets minimum standards for housing and care [Art.5] and the training of personnel handling
animals and supervising the experiments [Art.7(1),14].
It also aims at reducing the number of animals used for experiments by requiring that an
animal experiment should not be performed when an alternative method exists [Art.7(2)], and
by encouraging the development and validation of alternative methods to replace animal
methods [Art.23(1)]. The latter served as the basis for the Commission to set up the European
Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM) (35). Member states are imposed to
collect statistical information on numbers and use of animals in experiments [Art.13].
It should be emphasized, however, that the scope of Dir. 86/609/EEC is restricted to (1)
animal use in the framework of the development, manufacture, quality, effectiveness, and
safety testing of drugs, foodstuffs, and other substances or products and (2) to the protection of
the natural environment in the interests of the health or welfare of man or animal [Art.3]. Thus
the fields of scientific research, education, and training and forensic research are not covered
by this horizontal directive. Acknowledging this gap and to protect animals used in any
procedure that may possibly cause pain, suffering, distress, or lasting harm, the Council of
Europe published Decision 1999/575/EC (36). Herein, a number of conclusions of the 1986
European Convention for the protection of vertebrate animals used for experimental and other
scientific purposes are officially approved. Basically, they defend the same principles as Dir.
86/609/EEC, but they additionally cover the neglected areas.
With the scientific progress made since 1986 and increasing political pressure on the
development of alternative methods, a revision of Dir. 86/609/EEC was inevitable. Despite
years of surveys and discussions on several aspects of the Directive such as scope, ethics,
animal housing and care, statistical reporting, etc., allowing different parties to express their
Figure 3
Schematic presentation of “vertical” and “horizontal” cosmetic-related legislations in the EU.
Abbreviation: EU, European Union.
The Current Regulatory Context in the European Union
833

=== Page 851 ===
opinions and concerns, a generally revised version of the Directive is not yet available. The
most recent developments can be obtained through the EU Directorate General Environment
(DG ENV) Web site.f
General Product Safety Directive
The aim of the General Product Safety Directive (GPSD) (37) is to establish a coherent level of
consumer protection for all consumer products on the internal market. Thus, it automatically
covers many products, which are simultaneously regulated by the provisions of the vertical
legislations mentioned under 1.4. The legal provisions of Dir. 2001/95/EC are, however,
intended to be fully complementary while conveniently taking up consumer products falling
outside the scope of other community legislation (e.g., lighters) (38).
Out of the numerous provisions of the GPSD, the following ones deserve special
attention due to their relevance to the cosmetic field (38):
1.
The basic principle of the GPSD is that only “safe” consumer products are allowed to
be placed on the European market [Art.3(1)]. A safe product is defined as any product
which, under normal or reasonably foreseeable conditions of use including duration and,
where applicable, putting into service, installation and maintenance requirements, does not
present any risk or only the minimum risks compatible with the product’s use, considered to
be acceptable and consistent with a high level of protection for the safety and health of persons
[Art.2(B)] (37).
At first sight, this completely corresponds with the provision of the Cosmetic
Products Directive that a cosmetic product must not cause damage to human health
(1). Nevertheless, it should be noted that the GPSD goes further by also covering, e.g.,
mechanical injuries caused by packaging of cosmetic products.
2.
The GPSD describes active post-marketing activities for producers as well as
competent authorities. The producers are obliged to perform sample testing, keep a
register of complaints, and inform their distributors. They also need to alert the
competent authorities. The latter are expected to take the appropriate steps to
coordinate market surveillance and report every consumer product health risk into
the harmonized European rapid exchange of information (RAPEX) system. This
allows other member states to take necessary precautions with regard to similar
products. The Cosmetic Products Directive includes a market follow up requirement
as part of the information that should be kept readily available to the member states’
competent authorities, but does not include any mandatory filing.
3.
The GPSD gives the member states the authority to withdraw products from the
market in case they are found unsafe. This provision is not taken up in the Cosmetic
Products Directive, which means that for a withdrawal of a cosmetic product from
the EU market, reference will be made to the GPSD.
EU Legislation on Prepackaged Products and Nominal Quantities
The term prepackaged product covers not only a wide range of consumer products, among
which a large variety of foodstuffs but also cosmetics products. As early as 1976, Dir. 76/
211/EEC related to metrological requirements for prepackaged products introduced the
concept of mentioning the EU-harmonized e-sign on the product label in case the
metrological requirements specified in the Directive were respected (prepackages between
5 g and 10 kg) (39).
For example, the tolerated error between the actual content (measured weight/volume of
product) and the nominal quantity (quantity indicated on the prepackage, i.e., the weight/
volume the prepackage is deemed to contain) is not allowed to be exceeded, the nominal
quantity needs to be preceded by the e-sign and displayed in correct metrological units and
marked in figures of predefined sizes depending on the overall size of the package. It must be
mentioned that this Directive is currently under revision.g
fhttp://ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/lab_animals/revision_en.htm. Accessed February 2008.
gDetails through http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/prepack/metrol_requir/inmetrolog_requir_en.htm. Accessed
February 2008.
834
Pauwels and Rogiers

=== Page 852 ===
In addition to the above-mentioned metrological requirements related to the use of the
e-sign, Dir. 80/232/EEC imposes restrictions on the allowed nominal quantities for skin care and
oral hygiene products, hair care and bathing products, alcohol-based cosmetics, deodorants, and
personal hygiene products and talcum powders (40). However, this was considered to hamper the
freedom of producers to provide goods according to consumer tastes and to hinder competition as
regards quality and price on the internal market, wherefore Dir. 80/323/EEC is repealed.
From 11 April, 2009, onward, member states may not, on grounds relating to the nominal
quantities of the package, refuse, prohibit, or restrict the placing on the market of prepackaged
cosmetics (41).
EU Legislation on Aerosol Dispensers
In 1975, the Council of Europe drafted a Directive dealing with measures for the specific
category of aerosol dispensers, independent of their content. The rationale was that viewing
the presence of a gas compressed, liquefied or dissolved under pressure, aerosol dispenser’s
call for specific investigations. Capacities and volumes of individual powder, liquid or gas
phases, flammability issues, coating of containers, and valve sealing are examples of aspects
that need to be addressed before the European 3-sign is allowed to be placed on the aerosol
dispenser’s label (42). Dir. 75/324/EEC (42) also covers deodorants and any other cosmetic
spray.
However, it must be mentioned that this Directive is optional, meaning that member
states can, under their national law, allow the marketing of aerosol dispensers not complying
to Dir. 75/324/EEC, provided they do not bear the 3-sign (43).
CONCLUSION
This chapter shows that the European cosmetic legislation foresees some clear duties,
requirements, and prohibitions related to the placing on the market of finished cosmetic
products. Simultaneously, however, it forms part of an extensive web of vertical and
horizontal legislations intended to ensure the free movement and safe use of chemical-related
substances within the EU. Basic knowledge on these individual legislative texts has become an
essential tool to navigate within the European cosmetic world and understand some problems
the concerned parties can be faced with today and in the near future.
REFERENCES
1. Council Directive 76/768/EEC of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
relating to cosmetic products. OJ L262, 169–200, 27 September 1976.
2. Council Directive 93/35/EEC of 14 June 1993 amending for the sixth time Directive 76/768/EEC on the
approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products. OJ L151, 32–37, 23 June 1993.
3. Cosmetics Directive 76/768/EEC, Explanatory Brochure. The European Cosmetic Toiletry and
Perfumery Association, January 2004.
4. Pauwels M, Rogiers V. Considerations in the safety assessment of cosmetics. In: Business Briefing: Global
Cosmetics Manufacturing. London: Touch Briefings, 2004. Available at: http://www.touchbriefings.com/
cdps/cditem.cfm?NID=846. Accessed December 2006.
5. Council Recommendation 89/49/EEC of 21 December 1988 concerning nationals of Member States
who hold a diploma conferred in a third State. OJ L019, 24, 24 January 1989.
6. Directive 2003/15/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 February 2003 amending
Council Directive 76/768/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to
cosmetic products. OJ L066, 26–35, 11 March 2003.
7. SCCP/1005/06: The SCCP’s Notes of Guidance for the Testing of Cosmetic Ingredients and their
Safety Evaluation, adopted by the SCCP during the 10th plenary meeting of 19 December 2006.
8. Pauwels M, Rogiers V. EU legislations affecting safety data availability of cosmetic ingredients. Regul
Toxicol Pharmacol 2007; 49:308–315.
9. Commission Decision 2004/210/EC of 3 March 2004 setting up Scientific Committees in the field of
consumer safety, public health and the environment. OJ L066, 45–50, 4 March 2004.
10. Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament. Fifth Report on the Statistics on
the Number of Animals used for Experimental and other Scientific Purposes in the Member States of the
European Union [SEC(2007)1455], COM(2007) 675 final. Brussels, 5 November 2007.
11. Commission Directive 97/18/EC of 17 April 1997 postponing the date after which animal tests are
prohibited for ingredients or combinations of ingredients of cosmetic products. OJ L114, 43–44, 1 May 1997.
The Current Regulatory Context in the European Union
835

=== Page 853 ===
12. Commission Directive 2000/41/EC of 19 June 2000 postponing for a second time the date after which
animal tests are prohibited for ingredients or combinations of ingredients of cosmetic products.
OJ L145, 25–26, 20 June 2000.
13. Commission of the European Communities proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council on cosmetic products (recast). [SEC(2008)117 & SEC(2008)118], COM(2008) 49 final,
2008/025 (COD). Brussels, 5 February 2008.
14. Council Directive 67/548/EEC of 27 June 1967 on the approximation of laws, regulations and
administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous
substances. OJ P196, 1–98, 16 August 1967.
15. Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006
concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH),
establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council
Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council
Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/
21/EC. OJ L396, 1–849, 30 December, 2006. Corrigendum in OJ L136, 3–280, 29 May 2007.
16. Council Directive 76/769/EEC of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and
administrative provisions of the Member States relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of
certain dangerous substances and preparations. OJ L262, 201–203, 27 September 1976.
17. Council Directive 92/32/EEC of 30 April 1992 amending for the seventh time Directive 67/548/EEC
on the approximation of the laws, Regulations and administrative provisions relating to the
classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances. OJ L154, 1–29, 5 June 1992.
18. Council Directive 73/173/EEC of 4 June 1973 on the approximation of Member States’ laws,
regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of
dangerous preparations (solvents). OJ L189, 7–29, 11 July 1973.
19. Council Directive 77/728/EEC of 7 November 1977 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and
administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the classification, packaging and labelling
of paints, varnishes, printing inks, adhesives and similar products. OJ L303, 23–33, 28 November 1977.
20. Council Directive 88/379/EEC of 7 June 1988 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and
administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the classification, packaging and labelling
of dangerous preparations. OJ L187, 14–30, 16 July 1988.
21. Directive 1999/45/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 1999 concerning the
approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to
the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous preparations. OJ L200, 1–68, 30 July 1999.
22. Council Directive 89/107/EEC of 21 December 1988 on the approximation of the laws of the Member
States concerning food additives authorised for use in foodstuffs intended for human consumption.
OJ L040, 27–33, 11 February 1989.
23. European Parliament and Council Directive 94/35/EC of 30 June 1994 on sweeteners for use in
foodstuffs. OJ L237, 3–12, 10 September 1994.
24. European Parliament and Council Directive 94/36/EC of 30 June 1994 on colours for use in
foodstuffs. OJ L237, 13–29, 10 September 1994.
25. European Parliament and Council Directive No 95/2/EC of 20 February 1995 on food additives other
than colours and sweeteners. OJ L061, 1–40, 18 March 1995.
26. Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying
down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety
Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety. OJ L031, 1–24, 1 February 2002.
27. Directive 98/8/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 concerning the
placing of biocidal products on the market. OJ L123, 1–63, 24 April 1998.
28. Council Directive 65/65/EEC of 26 January 1965 on the approximation of provisions laid down by
Law, Regulation or Administrative Action relating to proprietary medicinal products. OJ 022, 369–
373, 9 February 1965.
29. Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the
Community code relating to medicinal products for human use. OJ L311, 67–128, 28 November 2001.
30. Regulation (EC) No 648/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on
detergents. OJ L104, 1–35, 8 April 2004.
31. Council Directive 91/414/EEC of 15 July 1991 concerning the placing of plant protection products on
the market. OJ L230, 1–32, 19 August 1991.
32. Council Directive 90/385/EEC of 20 June 1990 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
relating to active implantable medical devices. OJ L189, 17–36, 20 July 1990.
33. Council Directive 93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical devices. OJ L169, 1–43, 12 July 1993.
34. Council Directive 86/609/EEC of 24 November 1986 on the approximation of laws, regulations and
administrative provisions of the Member States regarding the protection of animals used for
experimental and other scientific purposes. OJ L358, 1–28, 18 December 1986.
836
Pauwels and Rogiers

=== Page 854 ===
35. SEC 91 1794 Final. Communication from the Commission to the Council and the Parliament:
establishment of a European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods (CEVMA).
Commission of the European Communities, Brussels, 29 October 1991. Available at http://ecvam
.jrc.it/index.htm. Accessed February 2008.
36. Council Decision of 23 March 1998 concerning the conclusion by the Community of the European
Convention for the protection of vertebrate animals used for experimental and other scientific
purposes. OJ L222, 29–37, 24 August 1999.
37. Directive 2001/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 December 2001 on general
product safety. OJ L011, 4–17, 15 January 2002.
38. Guidance Document on the Relationship between the General Product Safety Directive (GPSD) and
certain Sector Directives with Provisions on Product Safety. European Commission Directorate
General Health and Consumer Protection (DG SANCO), November 2003. Available at: http://ec
.europa.eu/consumers/cons_safe/prod_safe/gpsd/guidance_gpsd_en.pdf. Accessed February 2008.
39. Council Directive 76/211/EEC of 20 January 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member
States relating to the making-up by weight or by volume of certain prepackaged products. OJ L046,
1–11, 21 February 1976.
40. Council Directive 80/232/EEC of 15 January 1980 on the approximation of the laws of the Member
States relating to the ranges of nominal quantities and nominal capacities permitted for certain
prepackaged products. OJ L051, 1–7, 25 February 1980.
41. Directive 2007/45/EC Of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 laying
down rules on nominal quantities for prepacked products, repealing Council Directives 75/106/EEC
and 80/232/EEC, and amending Council Directive 76/211/EEC. OJ L247, 17–20, 21 September 2007.
42. Council Directive 75/324/EEC of 20 May 1975 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
relating to aerosol dispensers. OJ L147, 40–47, 9 June 1975.
43. ENTR.H06/KS D(2004). Aerosol Dispensers Directive 75/324/EEC: Update to technical progress,
Issue Paper. European Commission Enterprise and Industry Directorate General, Brussels, 28 January
2005. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/pressure_equipment/aerosol_sector/consultations/
issue_paper.pdf. Accessed Feb 2008.
The Current Regulatory Context in the European Union
837

=== Page 856 ===
78
Trends in Cosmetic Regulations in the U.S.A.
F. Anthony Simion
Kao Brands Company, Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A.
INTRODUCTION
The regulatory environment for cosmetics in the U.S.A. is rapidly evolving. This is not due to
changes in the U.S. regulatory framework for cosmetics; rather it is the effect of globalization.
Globalization impacts cosmetic regulation in two, somewhat related, ways. Firstly, as
manufacturers of both cosmetic raw materials and finished products try to sell their goods
in multiple markets, they must abide by the regulations in each market. The U.S. is just one of
the major markets in which companies sell their products. Other large, key markets include the
European Union (EU), Japan, and China. The framework developed by the EU is becoming the
model towards which many other countries and regions are gravitating. Thus, if an ingredient
or product is to be compliant on a global, rather than on a national or even regional basis, it
must take account of EU requirements.
Secondly, another impact of globalization is rapid communication. News stories about
issues and problems are rapidly transmitted between countries and regions. Unfortunately, the
Internet does not assess the accuracy or validity of the information. Furthermore, interested
parties such as nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and activists in different countries
rapidly communicate with and learn from each other and determine what works and what
does not. The NGOs have been very effective at molding public opinion, especially in Europe,
and building coalitions that can change the regulatory environment at the legislative level.
The U.S. cosmetics industry through its trade association, the Personal Care Products
Council (PCPC), is working to meet these challenges. The PCPC is working in parallel with
trade associations in other regions, such as Colipa in Europe, to provide a balancing opinion as
well as to influence the legislative and regulatory processes. This will become an even more
important initiative in the future, if the U.S. cosmetic industry is to remain innovative and, to a
large degree, self-regulating.
U.S. FEDERAL COSMETIC LAWS AND REGULATIONS
The underlying regulatory framework for cosmetic products at the federal level in the U.S.A.
has remained unchanged for 70 years. The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act of 1938 (1)
defines a cosmetic as:
. . .articles intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled, or sprayed on, introduced into, or
otherwise, applied to the human body or any part thereof for cleansing beautifying,
promoting attractiveness or altering the appearance.
It is the intent of the product, as defined by the claims made for its benefits, which
determines whether the product is a drug or a cosmetic. One result has been the ability of
marketers to sail closer and closer to this divide, making claims that suggest true physiological
benefits, which would make them a drug, only to cleverly phrase the claim so it relates to
appearance, making it a cosmetic. Frequently, these products are incorrectly termed
“cosmeceuticals,” which is a marketing term not a legal category. As one company makes a
questionable claim, others rush to meet it and push the claim even closer to drug status. At
some point, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recognizes that such advertising has
crossed into drug claims and brings legal action or sends “Warning” or “Regulatory” letters.
This happened in the mid-1960s with the “Wrinkle Remover” cases, and again in the late 1980s
when the focus was on claims of antiaging and cell rejuvenation, and periodically since then.
The cosmetic industry then recalibrates itself, learns where the new boundaries are, and

=== Page 857 ===
pursues other directions. The current interest in cosmeceuticals must be evaluated against the
regulatory framework of only having drugs and cosmetics in the U.S.A. As there is no
cosmeceutical category in the U.S., these products must fall into one of the two established
statutory categories.
Another effect of the U.S. definitions of drugs and cosmetics is that a single formula can
be either a drug or cosmetic, depending on the claims made. One good example is a soap
containing triclocarban. If it is sold as a deodorant soap, it is cosmetic as deodorancy improves
attractiveness. In contrast, the same formula being sold as antimicrobial soap, making disease
prevention claims, is a drug (2). Another example is a clear antiperspirant gel made by Gillette
in 1995, which was originally marketed as a deodorant. It made the claim of higher deodorancy
than other deodorant products. Gillette successfully defended this claim with the National
Advertising Division (NAD) of the Better Business Bureau on the basis of the antiperspirant
technology being more effective at reducing body odor than that used in deodorants, which do
not contain aluminum salt (3). The one exception to that general rule is where the included
therapeutic ingredient, such as penicillin, is so well known that its very presence in a product
would imply therapeutic, i.e., drug benefits (2).
There is no premarketing review or approval required before selling a new cosmetic in
the U.S. Thus the FDA only regulates cosmetic products once they have reached the
marketplace. Last year, in their review of nanotechnology, the FDA confirmed that this
approach was appropriate for cosmetics (4). The FDA does have the ability to exclude
ingredients that they believe to be harmful. In the past they have declared that the presence of
halogenated salicylanilides such as tribromsalan (TBS, 3,40,5-tribromosalicylanilide) or hexa-
chlorophene in a cosmetic would result in an adulterated product. In 2005, the FDA issued a
“guidance” to the effect that cosmetic products containing a-hydroxyl acids (AHA) should
carry the sun burn alert, unless the manufacturer had data that showed that the increased
AHA-induced UV damage to the skin would not occur (5).
There are many consumer products that carry both drug and cosmetic claims and are
therefore governed by both sets of regulations. In practice, as the drug regulations are more
stringent for many aspects including manufacturing (Good Manufacturing Practices, GMP)
and adverse event reporting, these combination products are effectively regulated as drugs.
Many of these combinations are over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, and as long as the monograph
requirements are met, preapproval to enter the marketplace is not required. OTC regulations
continue to slowly evolve. Some of the monographs that impact personal-care products have
been finalized, such as antiacne and antidandruff. Others are still at the tentative final stage,
such as antimicrobial. The monograph for sunscreen products is still a work in progress. In
August 2007, the FDA proposed changes to the monograph related to UVA testing, labeling,
and use instructions (6). It is not clear when these amendments will be finalized.
Like the personal-care industry, the FDA has recognized the increasing concern of some
of the general public regarding the safety of cosmetics. In 2004, The Environmental Working
Group (EWG) petitioned the FDA to take a more active regulatory role, including the
preapproval of cosmetics before they were marketed. The FDA rejected the petition, believing
that it already had sufficient authority to regulate cosmetics and ensure their safety (7). This is
similar to the position that the agency took on nanotechnology. Since then, the FDA has
strengthened the voluntary registration of manufacturing premises and ingredient statements,
which has existed since the 1970s. The voluntary annual reporting of adverse events was
discontinued in the mid-1990s and has not been reintroduced, except for those that are
“Serious and Unexpected.” At the same time the personal-care industry has proactively
introduced a program, the Consumer Commitment Code, to make the safety assurance process
for cosmetics more complete and transparent. It is described in more detail in the section “U.S.
Cosmetic Industry’s Response to the Changing Regulatory Environment,” and is in part based
on the work of the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR), a board of independent dermatologists
and toxicologists that reviews the safety of cosmetic ingredients. The FDA has a nonvoting
liaison status with the CIR.
Over the last 40 years, several legislators have attempted to increase the role of the
federal government, especially the FDA, in the regulation of cosmetics and their safety. The U.
S. cosmetics industry has successfully remained, mainly, self-regulatory by continuing to
develop comprehensive safety programs that meet the government’s and the public’s
expectations, while maintaining an excellent safety record in the marketplace.
840
Simion

=== Page 858 ===
The FDA is not the only federal agency that has jurisdiction over cosmetics and the
personal-care industry. The Consumer Product Safety commission regulates some aspects of
product labeling under the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (FPLA). The Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) also regulates the packaging and labeling of those cosmetic
products that contain ethanol (8). The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has jurisdiction over
the fairness of advertising, especially as it relates to false or misleading claims. Recently, the
FTC has become more active in ensuring compliance with advertising rules for both cosmetics
and dietary supplements, especially in the areas of weight loss and hair growth where there
has been a long history of questionable claims.
STATE LAWS AND REGULATION OF COSMETICS IN THE UNITED STATES
For many years, individual states in the U.S. have had laws and regulations that impact
cosmetics. Primary examples of this are from California, where the volatile organic compound
(VOC) regulations have changed the composition of many cosmetic products such as
hairsprays. The California Proposition 65 limits the level of potential carcinogens and
reproductive toxicants that a person can be exposed to each day; otherwise warning labeling is
required. Such regulations can impact personal-care products across the U.S. It is difficult to
control distribution of a product once it leaves the manufacturer’s warehouse and reaches
mass merchandisers. Therefore, many manufacturers follow the requirements of California
across the entire U.S.A.
Recently, California passed the Safe Cosmetics Act (2005) (9). This requires manufac-
turers to disclose to the State of California the intentional addition of potential carcinogens and
reproductive toxicants. These would be posted on a Website that the public can access.
Currently, the State of California is working with the various stakeholders to determine the
best way to implement the law. We have yet to see the law’s impact on the cosmetics industry.
Frequently, other states have discussed new cosmetic laws, but most have not been
enacted into law. For instance, Massachusetts is considering a law saying that one cannot sell a
cosmetic product with an ingredient that the CIR has said is unsafe. In the first year, companies
will have the opportunity to remove the unsafe ingredient; the following year the product will
be considered adulterated. Again, modern distribution systems for their products prevent
companies from segregating products and preventing their sale in a specific state. Hence, such
a law will have national or at least regional impact in the U.S. This does not take account of any
publicity that may arise when a product cannot be sold in a specific area because of safety
concerns.
Obviously, the personal-care industry prefers to have a single set of laws and regulations
to follow, rather than separate requirements in each state. Furthermore, since many of the laws
related to product safety utilize information and analysis published by panels or committees of
experts, industry is trying to ensure that a few lists of the highest scientific quality are used as
the basis of the regulations.
IMPACT OF EU LAWS AND REGULATIONS ON U.S. COSMETICS INDUSTRY
Although they do not have the force of law in the U.S., EU (and Canadian) cosmetic
regulations are having a great impact on the development of raw materials and cosmetic
products in the U.S. This is because cosmetics manufacturers want to be able to develop global
formulas or, at least, ones that can be sold in a major market of the U.S. and EU. To do this, the
products must be compliant with both sets of cosmetic regulations, and in this way, the EU
impacts cosmetics produced in the U.S. Furthermore, Canada and Mexico are beginning to
take more account of EU regulations as they develop their own. In this way, a Pan-North
American personal-care product, will be impacted by the EU, even if the product is not
intended for distribution in Europe. Indeed, Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
has modeled their new cosmetic regulations on the EU.
For ingredient safety, there has already been a degree of harmonization. The science of
toxicology is the same around the world. Thus, the criteria in evaluating safety that are applied
by the advisory bodies in the U.S. (CIR) and in the EU (the scientific committee on cosmetic
Trends in Cosmetic Regulations in the U.S.A.
841

=== Page 859 ===
products, SCCP) tend to be similar. This contrasts with labeling regulations where there is far
less commonality among different regions on the basis of language requirements, as well as
national sensibilities and expectations around product performance claims. The exception to
this is the ingredient declaration, where the INCI nomenclature is becoming the global
standard.
In the future, the regulation burden on cosmetic ingredients will increase in the EU with
the introduction of the REACH (Registration, Evaluation, and Authorization of Chemicals)
legislation and the animal testing and marketing ban, which commences for single dose
methods in March 2009. It is not clear whether the effect of REACH will be as great in the U.S.
as it will be in Europe. Many raw materials will have to be REACH compliant; they will have
to meet EU regulations to be sold in Europe, and precluding the EU market will significantly
reduce ingredient manufacturers’ return on their investments. The same will hold true for the
animal testing ban and its impact on the development of new raw materials in the cosmetic
industry. Even with fragrances, EU regulations can impact formulas sold in the U.S. The EU
requires labeling in the presence of fragrance ingredients that are putative allergens when they
exceed specific thresholds. Many cosmetic manufacturers want to avoid such labeling for, at
the minimum, it can significantly lengthen the ingredient statement. If a cosmetic manufac-
turer is going to have a global fragrance for the global product, again, EU regulations will have
an impact.
In the past, the attempts to harmonize cosmetic regulations at the governmental level
have been unsuccessful. However, industry pressures such as global economy of scales have
led to a de facto harmonization of ingredients in products. Currently, the International
Committee on Cosmetic Regulations (ICCR), which includes industry as well as governments
and other stakeholders, is working to harmonize many of the tests, methods, and procedures
so single methods and assays can be used across different jurisdictions and regulatory
frameworks. Issues discussed at their first meeting (September 2007) include GMP, ingredient
statements/INCI, nanotechnology, in-market surveillance as well as animal testing and
alternative methods. A summary can be found at http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/cosiccr
.html.
U.S. COSMETIC INDUSTRY’S RESPONSE TO THE CHANGING
REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT
In the U.S., the cosmetic industry association (PCPC) is responding to the pressures of the
activists and others concerned with the safety of cosmetics. Traditionally, the Council, when it
was known as the Cosmetic Toiletry and Fragrance Association (CTFA), focused on its
relationship with the U.S. federal and state governments. However, in the last five years, the
NGOs in the U.S. have been having a greater impact on state legislators and in the court of
public opinion. An example of the former is the pressure that was exerted in California that
resulted in passage of the Safe Cosmetic Act (2005). Seeing this trend and recognizing what has
already happened in the EU could portend what happens in the U.S.; the U.S. cosmetic
industry is becoming more proactive in meeting this challenge. It has realized that it needs to
increase its efforts to provide accurate information to the public and the press and use this as
the starting point in influencing public opinion. The result is several initiatives from the
council, which include
l The Consumer Commitment Code: industry is working to make the safety assessment
process more transparent to the press and public in general. The code emphasizes that
cosmetic manufacturers have a solid scientific basis for the safety of both the
ingredients that they use and the final product.
l For ingredients, it is recommended that companies use the assessments of expert
authoritative bodies such as the CIR, FDA, SCCP, or NICNAS (Australia’s National
Industrial Chemicals Notification and Assessment Scheme) as the basis of the safety
assurance process. Indeed, ingredients that the CIR finds to be unsafe should be
excluded from products. Ingredients with a CIR-“insufficient” data finding should
only be used if the company has enough scientifically valid data to support their
safe use.
842
Simion

=== Page 860 ===
l Serious and unexpected adverse events (reactions) should be reported to the FDA in
a timely manner.
l The FDA can make written requests to review the data that form the basis of a
product’s safety assessment.
l The council has set up a Website to give accurate information to the press and public in
a way that is easier for them to understand. Its address is www.cosmeticsinfo.org.
These efforts are a start in the industry’s goal to remain self-regulating. To do this
successfully will require that industry effectively manage attacks from the activist NGOs.
They have been active and effective in the EU. Their counterparts in the U.S. have been
following their lead. The U.S. industry must watch what is happening in the EU, because
with the rapid communications across the Atlantic, those regulations will be proposed in the
U.S. very quickly.
CONCLUSIONS
Although the legal framework for cosmetic regulation has not significantly changed in the U.S.
for 70 years, in practice, the U.S. regulatory environment is evolving rapidly. With
globalization of raw materials and cosmetic formulas, the U.S. cosmetic industry is impacted
by regulatory regimes from the different regions in which the ingredients and products are
sold. This is especially true for the framework developed in the EU, which appears to be
becoming the international benchmark. Many countries and regions are following the EU’s
model, or at minimum, incorporating some of the EU’s approaches in their regulatory
framework. Therefore, it is important for U.S. companies and industry to work closely with,
and support their EU counterparts, as the Europeans try to influence their legislative and
regulatory processes.
Green and other activist groups have been more politically influential in Europe than
they are in the U.S. However, in the last few years, the U.S. NGOs have become more vocal and
successful in influencing public opinion and legislators. This resulted in the passage of the
California Safe Cosmetics Act (2005). The U.S. personal-care industry has not been willing to
cede the “court of public opinion” to the activists. The PCPC (industry association) has
developed a website (www.cosmeticsinfo.org) to provide accurate information to the public,
and especially to the press. Additionally, the PCPC is working to make the product safety
assurance process more transparent, through the introduction of the Consumer Commitment
Code. In contrast, the FDA is not changing its approach; instead it is using the current
regulatory structure to respond to scientific advances such as nanotechnology and to pressure
from the activist NGOs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author wishes to thank Peter Hutt Esq. for his comments on the draft manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Food Drug and Cosmetic Act (1938) Section 201(i).
2. Hutt PB. The Legal Distinction in the United States between a Cosmetic and a Drug. In: Elsner P,
Maibach HI, eds. Cosmeceuticals: Drugs versus Cosmetics. Marcel Dekker, 2000:223–240.
3. Gillette Series Clear-Gel Antiperspirant and Deodorant. NAD Case Reports p. 84–85. 1993. Pub.
National Advertising Division of the Better Business Bureau
4. Nanotechnology: A Report of the US Food and Drug Administration Nanotechnology Task Force
2007, July 27. Available at: www.fda.gov/nanotechnology/nano_tf.html.
5. Guidance for Industry: Labeling for Topically Applied Cosmetic Products Containing a-Hydroxy
Acids as Ingredients. 2005 January 10. Office of Colors and Cosmetics. Center of Food Safety and
Applied Nutrition. Food and Drug Administration. Available at: www.cfsan.fda.gov/guidance.html.
Trends in Cosmetic Regulations in the U.S.A.
843

=== Page 861 ===
6. Sunscreen Drug Products for Over-The-Counter Human Use; Proposed Amendment of the Final
Monograph. 21CFR Parts 347 and 352. 2007 August 10.
7. Letter from the FDA to Ms. Houlihan and Ms. Callender. Environmental Working Group in response
to their Citizen’s Petition. Docket No. 2004P-0266/CPI. 2005 September 29.
8. Armstrong C, Austin J. Cosmetics. In: Brown-Tuttle M, ed. Fundamentals of US Regulatory Affairs.
Rockville MD: Regulatory Affairs Professional Society, 2007:197–201.
9. Senate bill. Available at: http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/05-06/bill/sen/sb_0450500/
sb_484_bill_20051007_chaptered.pdf.
844
Simion

=== Page 862 ===
Index
AA. See Amino acids
AAR. See Aspartic acid racemization (AAR)
Absorption bases, and petrolatum emulsions, 125
Absorption coefficients, of principal skin
components, 276
Accumulation, glycation end products
body weight, and age, 263–265
measurement, 263
smoking, and age, 263–265
ACD. See Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD)
Acetone, 162, 168, 177. See also Dihydroxyacetone
(DHA)
ACH. See Aluminum chlorohydrate; Buffered
aluminum salts
Acne cosmetica, 439
Acne neonatorum, 614, 620
Acne type, sensitive skin, 34
Acrylates, 558
Actinic aging
with ages, 16
in ethnic races, 13–14
Active compounds, oral cosmetics
choline-stabilized orthosilicic acid
(ch-OSA), 682
glycosaminoglycans, 681–682
minerals, 680–681
multicomponent supplements, 683
polyphenolic compounds, 681
polyunsaturated fatty acids, 682–683
screening of, 679
vitamins, 679–680
Acute irritant dermatitis, 471
Acyl ethylenediamines, 779
Acyl glutamates, 775
Acyl peptides, 775
AD. See Atopic dermatitis (AD), and skin
sensitivity
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 175
ADI. See Autosomal dominant ichthyosis vulgaris
(ADI)
ADPV. See Adsorption differential pulse
voltametry
Adsorption differential pulse voltametry
(ADPV), 198
Advanced glycation end products (AGE), 261.
See also Glycation end products
AEOS. See Alcohol ethoxy sulfates (AEOS)
Aerosol dispensers, EU legislation, 835
Aerosols
antiperspirant, 638–639
deodorants, 648
AES. See Alkyl ether sulfates (AES)
Aethiopathogenesis, of cellulite, 606
AFM. See Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
African skins, 10
After-sun preparations
anti-inflammatory substances, 333–334
antioxidants, 334–335
moisturizers, 333
other ingredients, 334–336
After-sun products
green tea extract in, 334
preparations and active ingredients of, 332–336
relevant effects of sunlight on skin, 331–332
skin care after sun exposition, 332
AGE. See Advanced glycation end products (AGE)
Age. See also Aging
friction coefficient and, 419–420
markers, 234
and skin sensitivity, 68
Aging, 233–240
active cosmetic ingredients, 626–628
antiaging actives, 627
extrinsic, 292–293, 677–678
formulating effective cosmeceuticals
botanical extracts, 133
peptide/vitamin derivatives/botanicals,
130–133
intrinsic, 291–292, 677
photoaging, 625
physiological changes in cutaneous
dermal changes, 625–626
epidermal changes, 626
reactive oxygen species, 625
types, 236
a-glycosylrutin (AGR), 627
AGR. See a-glycosylrutin
AHA. See a-hydroxy acids (AHA)
a-hydroxy acids (AHA), 296, 333, 627, 746, 751
federal laws for products containing, 840
lactic acid, 111
Alcohol ethoxy sulfates (AEOS), 770
Alcohol-free formulated systems, 637
Alcohols, comedogenic scores of, 584
Aliphatic acetates, 749
Alkali/acidic aggression tests, of skin buffering
capacity, 215, 218
Alkaline
formulations, 124
hydrolysis, 769
Alkane sulfonates, 773
Alkanolamides, 782

=== Page 863 ===
Alkoxylated alcohols, 780
Alkoxylated lanolin derivatives, 361
Alkoxylated polysiloxanes, 785
Alkyl
betaines, 777
carbohydrates esters, 784
dimethicones, 373
esters, 750
glyceride sulfates, 772
phosphates, 774
polyglycol ether, 770
sulfates, 771
sulfonates, 772–773
Alkylamines, 775–776
Alkyl-aryl sulfonates, 773
Alkyl ether sulfates (AES), 771–772
Alkylimidazolines, 776
Alkyl polyglycosides (APG), 771, 781
Alkyl quaternary cellulose polymers, 367
Allergens. See also Six fragrance allergens
antioxidants
propyl gallate, 557
sodium metabisulfite, 557
category-specific ingredients, 557–558
coloring agents, 558
emulsifiers, 558
excipients, 558
fragrance ingredients, 555–556, 557
identification, 558–559
preservatives, 556–557
Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), 437,
438, 443
kojic acid and, 590
nail polishes and, 752, 754
sodium metabisulfite and, 557
Allergic reactions, nail
cyanoacrylate nail preparations, 763–764
methacrylic acid–containing primers, 764
sculptured nails, 763
Allergic type, sensitive skin, 35
ALS. See Ammonium lauryl sulfate (ALS)
Aluminum chlorohydrate (ACH), 631
Aluminum zirconium glycine (AZG), 632
Amide ether sulfates, 772
Amines, 694
Amino acids (AA), 364
in buffering capacity of skin, 217–218
Ammonium lauryl sulfate (ALS), 771
Ammonium titanium lactate (ATL), 633
Amodimethicones, 373, 696
Amontons’ law, for friction coefficient of
skin, 415
Amphoteric surfactants, 778–779
Anatomical differences
between baby and adult skin, 613–615
Anatomical sites, skin sensitivity
exposed skin, 68
vulva, 68–70
Anatomic sites
friction coefficient and, 419–420
friction coefficient in, 419–420
hexyl nicotinate (HN) in, 26–27
Anhydrous aerosol formulations, 633–634
Animals
protection
ban on testing, 828
EU (horizontal) legislation for, 833–834
tests, 814
Anionic surfactants, 769–775
carboxylates, 769–771
phosphates esters, 774–775
sulfates, 771–772
sulfonates, 772–774
Antiadhesives, 646–647
Antiaging actives, 627
Antiaging products, 295–296
oral cosmetics, 297
Anticellulite products/treatment, 608–609.
See also Cellulite
Anti-inflammatory ingredients, 463
cooling compounds, 334
hamamelis, 333
polyhydroxy acids, 333
Anti-irritants
for dryness/tightness perception, 465
for negative sensory skin feel, 465
for stinging, burning, and itching sensations,
464–465
Anti-irritation
by mild surfactants, 458
by nonionic surfactants, 458
by polymers, 462
by primary surfactants, 459
by proteins/peptides, 462–463
by refattening agents, 463
by secondary surfactants, 459
Anti-itch testing, 573–579
electronic devices for, 576
histamine-induced itch human model, 573–576
models and efficacy of antipruritics, 577–579
questionnaires for, 577
scratch behavior measurement, 576
Antimicrobial active
glycerolether, 645–646
glyceryl fatty acid ester, 645
sucrose fatty acid ester, 645
triclosan, 645
Antimicrobial properties, of skin
in ethnic races, 52–53
Antioxidant efficiency, vitamin E prodrugs,
349–350
Antioxidants, 296, 301–307, 324, 334–335
antioxidant network, 306
against oxidative stress, 463–464
polyphenols, 305
propyl gallate, 557
regulation of gene transcription, 307
sodium metabisulfite, 557
thiol, 304–305
vitamin C, 303–304
vitamin E, 301–303
Antioxidative defense system, 627
Antiperspirants, 631–639, 644
aluminum zirconium glycine, 632
application forms for, 633
aerosols, 638–639
846
Index

=== Page 864 ===
[Antiperspirants
application forms for]
roll-ons, 636–638
sticks, 634–636
biology of sweat glands in the human axilla, 631
buffered aluminum salts, 632
current model/theory of, 632
drug delivery system for, 633
film-forming polymers, 633
formulation work for, 633
lyotropic liquid crystals, 633
silicones in, 378
sweat reduction by, 632
titanium metal chelates, 633
Antipruritics
evaluation, 573–579
electronic devices for, 576
histamine-induced itch human model, 573–576
questionnaires for, 577
scratch behavior measurement, 576
models and efficacy of, 577–579
and seawater, 547
Anti-sensory irritation, 464
a-olefin sulfonates (AOS), 772
AOS. See A-olefin sulfonates (AOS)
APG. See Alkyl polyglycosides (APG)
Apligraf1, 541
Apocrine glands, 631
baby vs. adult skin, 615
Apocrine secretion odor-binding proteins, 643
Appendages, in HN absorption, 26–27
AQP3. See Aquaporin-3 (AQP3)
Aquaporin-3 (AQP3), 31–32
Aquaporins (AQP), 96
Arbutin, 589
Arm immersion model, 477
Artificial nails
advantages, 760
composition and technique, 755–760
hospital, 764
microbial contamination, 764–765
preformed plastic tips, 757–758
unwanted effects, 760–761
Artocarpus lakoocha extracts, 591
Ascorbic acid, 679
skin-whitening agents, 590
Asian skins, 10
ASOB/ASOB2. See Apocrine secretion
odor-binding proteins
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 542
Aspartic acid racemization (AAR), 243
Aspirin, anti-itch testing, 574
Asteatotic eczema, 440
ATF. See Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(ATF)
ATL. See Ammonium titanium lactate
Atomic force microscopy (AFM), hair, 718–719
Atopic dermatitis (AD), and skin sensitivity, 70
ATP. See Energy production
Australia, regulation of UV filters, 313
Autofluorescence measurement, skin, 263
Autosomal dominant ichthyosis vulgaris
(ADI), 167
Auxiliary ingredients, conditioners
emulsifiers, 699
humectants, 699
preservatives, 698
thickness, 698–699
AZG. See Aluminum zirconium glycine
Baby care products, 613–620. See also Cosmetics
acne neonatorum, 620
baby and adult skin
anatomical differences, 613–615
physiological differences, 615–616
cleansing cosmetics, 617–618
diaper rash, 620
miliaria, 620
protecting cosmetics, 618–619
for skin and hair, 616–619
Baby wipes, 618
Bacitracin1, 803
Bacterial enzyme inhibitors, 646
Barrier creams (BC), 197
brief data of recent experiments of, 202–203
Barrier models, skin, 95–96
Basal cell carcinomas (BCC), 240
Basal cells, 538
Basal membrane, baby vs. adult skin, 613
Bath products, for babies, 617
Baumann skin-type indicator (BSTI), 29–37
skin aging, 36–37
skin hydration, 29–33
oily skin versus dry skin, 29–32
skin care for O–D parameter, 32–33
skin pigmentation, 35–36
skin sensitivity, 33–35
acne type, 34
allergic type, 35
rosacea type, 34
sensitive versus resistant skin, 33–34
stinging type, 34–35
BC. See Barrier creams
BCC. See Basal cell carcinomas (BCC)
Behind-the-knee (BTK) test, 381–382
chemical irritation, 489
DAP of sensory effects, 386
results for products, 387
polarized light-enhanced visual scores of
sensory effects, 383–386
unaided visual scores of sensory effects,
382–383
upper arms and lower forearms, 490–491
Bending measurements, hair, 712–713
Benzophenone-3, 558
Benzophenones, 317
Benzoyl peroxide (BPO), 303
Benzylnicotinate (BN), 653
Berloque dermatitis, 440
Betamethasone-17-valerate (BM17V), 543
Bidirectional reflection distribution function
(BRDF) measurements, of visibility of skin
surface, 411
Biochemical penetration enhancement, 185
Biocidal Products Directive, 832
Index
847

=== Page 865 ===
Bioengineering instruments
advantages in using, 820
calibration of, 820
disadvantages, 821–823
calibration, 821
claims made by the cosmetic industry, 821
hydration measurements, 822
measuring units, 821
mechanical measurements on the skin,
821–822
sensitive skin, 822–823
single limited parameter, 821
standardization of, 820
validation of, 820
Bioengineering measurement methods, for testing
skin hydration, 135–139
clinical relevance of, 139
dynamic measurements
moisture accumulation test, 137–138
plastic occlusion stress test, 138–139
sorption-desorption test, 137
near-IR-based spectroscopic measurements, 139
static measurements
long-term tests/multiple applications, 137
short-term tests/single application, 136–137
Bioengineering tests, skin sensitivity
colorimetry, 87
corneometry, 87
corneosurfametry, 87–88
ISI, 88
LDV, 87
TEWL, 86–87
Biomechanical properties
with age, 16
in ethnic races, 13
in geographical locations, 18–19
between sexes, 15
Biotin, 680
Bismuth oxychloride crystals, 128
Blood-flow measurement
in cutaneous vascular reactivity to HN, 25
Blood vessel reactivity (BVR), 45–46
BMDBM. See Butyl methoxydibenzoylmethane
(BMDBM)
BN. See Benzylnicotinate
Body-cleansing products, 362
Body creams, baby, 618
Botanicals, 130–133
Bowman’s membrane, 537
Brain activation maps, 79, 80
Brain pattern analysis, sensitive skin, 76–80
materials, 76–78
methods, 76–78
rationale, 76
results, 78–79
Branched esters, 129
BRDF. See Bidirectional reflection distribution
function (BRDF) measurements
“Brick and mortar” model, 91–92
Brightness, of lipstick, 399
Bromine, 551
Browning reaction. See Maillard reaction
“Brown spot,” subclinical melanoderma, 285
BSTI. See Baumann skin-type indicator (BSTI)
BTK test. See Behind-the-knee (BTK) test
Buffer capacity, of skin, 215–218. See also Skin
hydration
acid/alkali aggression test, 215
CO2 participation in, 217
eccrine sweat contribution to, 216
free amino acids and, 217–218
free fatty acids/sebum in, 215–216
keratin contribution to, 216
SC thickness and, 216–217
water-soluble constituents, 216
Buffered aluminum salts (ACH), 632
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(ATF), 841
Butcher broom, 558
Butylene glycol, 109
Butyl methoxydibenzoylmethane (BMDBM),
317, 788
BVR. See Blood vessel reactivity (BVR)
Byakko-ka-ninjin-to (BN), anti-itch testing, 576
Caenorhabitis elegans, 266
Caffeine, 540, 541
Calcium
cell signaling in skin, 173–174
regulations, skin, 174–176
California, Safe Cosmetics Act (2005) of, 841
Calmodulin, 174
CAMP. See Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP)
Camphor, 750
derivatives, 316
Candida albicans, 53, 647
Cannabidiol1, 803
CAP. See Contact allergy patch
Capillaroscopy, 740
Capsaicin, 654–655
anti-itch testing, 575
for skin sensitivity test, 85
Carbon dioxide (CO2), role in buffering capacity of
skin, 217
Carbonyl stress, 262
Carbopol Aqua CC polymer, 699
Carboxamide cooling agents, 666–670
Carboxylates
ester carboxylates, 770
ether carboxylates, 770–771
salts, 769–770
b-Carotene derivatives, 679
CAT. See Catalase
Catabolic aging, 239
Catalase (CAT), 678
Catechin, chemical structure, 305
Cationic guar gum, 366–367
Cationic polymers, 695
Cationic surfactants, 458, 692–694, 775–778
alkylamines, 775–776
alkylimidazolines, 776
amines, 694
compatibility with anionics, 693
conditioner properties, 692–693
848
Index

=== Page 866 ===
[Cationic surfactants]
esterified quaternaries, 778
ethoxylated alkylamines, 778
hydrophobicity, 692–693
quaternary ammonium compounds, 776–778
Caucasian population. TEWL in, 41–43
Caucasian skin, 10
CBF. See Cutaneous blood flow (CBF)
C6-Cn fatty acids, 644
CD. See Contact dermatitis; Corner density
Cellular membranes, 670
Cellular senescence, 234–235
Cellulite, 603
etiology of, 604–606
matricial-interstitial unit’s alterations, 605
predisposing factors, 605–606
vascular modifications, 605
stages in progression of, 603–604
symptoms of, 603
objective evaluation of, 606–608
treatments of, 608–609
Ceramide lipids, 94, 95
CETAB. See Cetrimonium bromide
Cetrimonium bromide (CETAB), 692
Cetrimonium chloride, 692
Chamber scarification test, 200, 475, 476
Charge couple device (CCD) camera, 283, 284
Chatelain, 542
Chemical irritants, 455
Chemical peels, skin-whitening agents, 592
Chemical penetration enhancers (CPE), 185
classifications of, 185–191
mechanisms of, 191–192
Chitosan, 646
Chitosan-PCA, 363
Chloasma. See Melasma
Chloracne, 439
Choline-stabilized orthosilicic acid
(ch-OSA), 682
Ch-OSA. See Choline-stabilized orthosilicic acid
Chromophores, 276
mapping, 278
Chronic paronychia, 748
CI. See Congenital ichthyosis (CI)
Cinnamates, 316
CIR. See Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR)
Citrulline, 218
Cleansers
baby care products, 617–618
skin care product, 98–99
Cleansing effect, of silicones, 375–376
Cleansing milk, baby, 618
Clear anhydrous gel sticks, 635
Clear hydroalcoholic roll-on, 637
Clear O/W emulsions sticks, 636
Clear water-in-silicone emulsion gels, 636
Clinical scoring, of skin radiance, 412
Cocamidopropyl betaine, 558
Cocamidopropyl dimethylamine, 558
Cocamidopropyl-PG-dimonium chloride
phosphate, 558
Cocoa butter, comedogenic scores of, 585
Cocomonoglyceride sulfate (CMGS), 772
Colipa, 326
Collagen, 114, 244, 245–247
Collagenase (MMP-1), 307
Color
of lipstick, 399
of skin, 407
anatomical sites, 17–18
in ethnic races, 11–12
interaction between sex, 14
related to age, 16
Colorants, 750
Colorimeters to asses skin radiance, 408–409
Colorimetry, for skin sensitivity test, 87
Coloring agents, 558
Combing measurement, hair, 724–725
Comedogenesis, 286
Comedogenicity in rabbit, 583–586
discussion, 585–586
materials and methods, 583–584
results, 584–585
Comedogenic scores
of cocoa butter, 585
of esters and alcohols, 584
of petrolatum products, 585
of surfactants, 584
Commercial conditioners, 690–691
Compartmental analysis, prodrugs, 350
Complexion, skin, 407
Conditioners
auxillary ingredients of, 698–699
commercial, 690–691
hair. See Hair conditioners
intensive treatment, 690
leave-in, 690
Confocal microscopy, hair, 719–720
Congenital ichthyosis (CI), 167
Consumer Commitment Code, for
cosmetics, 842
Contact allergic reactions
allergens. See Allergens
application site, 554
composition, 553
concentration of ingredients, 554
contact time, 555
cross-sensitivity, 554
frequency of use, 553
penetration-enhancing agents, 554
pharmaceutical products, 554
purity of ingredients, 554
skin conditions, 554–555
Contact allergy patch (CAP), 200
Contact angle measurement, skin wettability,
427–428
data analysis, 429–430
Contact sensitivity, UV filters, 319
Contact SIAscopy, 277–278
Cooling agents, 334
carboxamide, 666–670
as insect repellent, 670
menthol related, 664–666
Cooling ingredients, 661–672
menthol, 661–666
Copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD), 678
Index
849

=== Page 867 ===
Cornea
damage to the, 537–538
irritation testing, 541–542
reconstructed models, 538
use of reconstructed corneal epithelia in safety
assessment, 538–539
Corneocytes, 6, 7, 91, 167, 275
Corneometer1, 499
Corneometry, for skin sensitivity test, 87
Corneosurfametry, for skin sensitivity test,
87–88
Corner density (CD), 141
Cortical cells, hair, 705
Corticosteroids, and skin sensitivity, 70
Corynebacterium xerosis, 647
Coryneform, 643
Cosmeceutical antiaging products, 295
Cosmeceuticals, 121
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association
(CTFA), 357
Cosmetically sensitive skin, 60
Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR), 840, 842
Cosmetic Science and Technology, 2
Cosmetic Toiletry and Fragrance Association
(CTFA), 842
Cosmetology, 1
Council Directive 76/768/EEC, 1
CPE. See Chemical penetration enhancers (CPE)
Creams, brittle nails, 747–748
Creatine, 627
Creatine kinase, 269
Critical surface tension (gc), skin wettability,
428–429
data analysis, 430
CSSS. See Cyanoacrylate skin surface stripping
(CSSS)
CTFA. See Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance
Association; Cosmetic Toiletry and
Fragrance Association (CTFA)
Cubebol, 666
Cultural factors, skin sensitivity, 70
‘‘21-day’’ cumulative irritation assay. See
Cumulative irritation testing
Cumulative irritation testing, 475–476, 513
Cutaneous aging, physiological changes in
dermal changes, 625–626
epidermal changes, 626
reactive oxygen species, 625
Cutaneous blood flow (CBF), 166
Cutaneous inflammatory cytokines, 548, 551
Cuticle, 687
cells, hair, 705
removers, 745–747
softeners, 747
Cutometer1, 294
Cyanoacrylate nail preparations, 763–764
Cyanoacrylate skin surface stripping (CSSS), 87, 88
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), 173
Cyclodextrins, for topical applications, 792
Cyclomethicones, 362, 697
Cysteic acid, 689
Cystine S-sulfonate, 689
Cytochrome P 450 IA1 (CYP IA1), 543
Dandruff, assessment of, 289
Dangerous Preparations Directive, EU, 831–832
Dangerous Substances Directive, EU, 830–831
DAP. See Descriptive analysis panel (DAP)
DD. See Dyskeratosis follicularis (DD)
DDD. See Dermal drug delivery (DDD)
Dead Sea
salt baths, 547
water therapy, 547–548
Decorative products, 391–404
formulations of, 391–397
eye makeup products, 396
face makeup products, 394–396
lipstick, 392–393
nail enamel, 393–394
interaction with skin care products, 398
quantitative assessment of properties of, 398–404
silicones used for, 373–376
Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH), 682
Delicate skin, 60
Delipidization, of PHSC, 810
Dendrimers, 790
Dendrites, 543–544
Deodorants, 643–649
aerosols, 648
antimicrobial active-containing, 645–646
antiperspirant active-containing, 644
application forms for, 647–649
concepts for controlling underarm odor
antiadhesives, 646–647
bacterial enzyme inhibitors, 646
chitosan, 646
odor-inhibiting precursor mimics, 646
product/skin-mediated perfume
transformations, 646
drug delivery system for, 647
esterase inhibitors, 645
formulation for, 647
odor-masking, 644
odor-neutralizing, 644
odor-quenching, 644–645
pump sprays, 648–649
silicones in, 378
sticks, 647
strategies to reduce underarm odor, 644
vitro evaluation of, 647
vivo evaluation of, 647
Deodorizers, 633
Deoxyarbutin, 591, 601
Dermal absorption, baby and adult skin, 615–616
Dermal changes, aging, 625–626
Dermal drug delivery (DDD), 183
Dermal function tests, sensitive skin, 64
Dermatitis. See also Allergic contact dermatitis
(ACD); Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD)
friction, 440
retinoid, 296
Dermatoglyphics, 141–142
Dermis, 5
baby vs. adult skin, 613
normal skin, 7
Dermo-epidermal junction (DEJ), 540
Descemet’s membrane, 537
850
Index

=== Page 868 ===
Descriptive analysis panel (DAP)
and feminine care products, 382
and products tested in BTK test, 387
Desquamation, 97
Detergent-based elastic vesicles, 798
Detergents, EU legislation on, 832
Dexpanthenol, 333
DHA. See Dihydroxyacetone
D-homoserine lactone, 668
Diaper
area, 615–616
rash, 620
Dibenzoylmethane derivatives, 558
Dibenzylidene sorbitol, 635
Dibutyl phthalate, 750
Dicetyldimonium chloride, 692
Diet, and skin hydration, 100
Dietary fatty acids, 682
Dihydroxyacetone (DHA), 339
action mechanism of, 340–341
additives of, 341
application of, 341
chemical structure of, 340
chemistry of, 339–340
formulation of, 340
history of, 339
indications, 342
safety in, 342
sunscreen activity, 341–342
tanning agents, 342–343
Dihydroxyphenyl alanine (DOPA), 544
Dimethicone copolyols, 372–373
emulsifiers, 125
foaming by, 377
in hair conditioning, 376, 696, 698
phosphates, 697
as resin plasticizer, 378
Dimethicones, 362, 372–373. See also Silicones
alkyl, 373
in FDA list, 375
in hair conditioning, 695–696
Dimethyldiallylammoniumchloride (DMDAAC),
367
Dimethylsulfoxide, for skin sensitivity, 85
3-[4,5-dimethyl-thiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl
tetrazolium bromide (MTT), 522, 523
Dipalmitoylethyl hydroxyethylmonium
methosulfate, 694
DMDAAC. See Dimethyldiallylammoniumchloride
DNA vaccines, 790
Domain mosaic model, 94, 95
Doxyl stearic acid (DSA) spin probe, 208–209
experimental and simulated EPR spectra
of, 211
experimental EPR spectra of, 212
schematic representation of conformation in SC
membrane, 211
Draize model, 471–473, 537, 538
scoring system in, 472
Drosophila melanogaster, 261
Drug skin penetration, from elastic
vesicles, 798
Drug skin permeation, from ethosomes, 803
Dry skin, 5, 7–9
vs. oily skin, 29–32
3D skin models. See Three-dimensional skin
models
DTH. See Delayed-type hypersensitivity
Dysfunctional skin, hydration effects in, 161–162
Dyskeratosis follicularis (DD), 167
EC. See European commission
Eccrine sweat glands, 631
baby vs adult skin, 615
ECM. See Extracellular matrix
Ectoine, 335
ECVAM. See European Center for the Validation of
Alternative Methods
EDTA. See Ethylenediaminetetraacetate
EKV. See Erythrokeratoderma variabilis (EKV)
Elastic properties, skin, 821
Elastic vesicles
detergent-based, 798
ethosomes, 802–803
nonphospholipid-based, 800–802
overview, 797
as penetration enhancers, 803–804
phospholipid-based, 798
skin interaction, 797–798
surfactant effects, 800
transfersomes, 799
Elastin, 244–250
Electrical conduction
antomical area, 18
in ethnic races, 12
increase with age, 16
between sexes, 14
Electrokinetic measurements, hair, 720–722
Electromyography, 177
Electronic devices, itch measurement, 576
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), for SC
probe
apparatus, 207
order parameter calculation, 210–212
conventional, 210
simulated and conventional, 211–212
by slow-motional EPR simulation, 210–211
skin penetration enhancer effects, 213
spin probe, 207–210
line shapes due to motion of, 209–210
nitroxide probe, 207–208
single-chain aliphatic, 208–209
surfactants effects, 213
Electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis
(ESCA), 697
Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy,
hair, 717
Electron transport system, 628
(E)-3-methyl-2-hexenoic acid (E-3M2H), 643
E-3M2H. See (E)-3-methyl-2-hexenoic acid
Emolliency, of silicones, 373–374
Emollients, 98, 99, 746
definition, 358
esters, 129
and friction coefficient of skin, 420–423
Index
851

=== Page 869 ===
[Emollients]
hydrophilic lipids, 360–361
hydrophobic, 360
lanolin, 361
lecithin, 361–362
lipophilic, 359–360
occlusive, 359–360
silicone derivatives, 362
Emulsifiers
conditioners ingredients, 699
and contact allergic reactions, 558
types of, 122
Emulsion-based cleanser, 98–99
Emulsions
for aging population, 127–128
defined, 121
types of, 121–122
absorption bases/petrolatum, 125
multiple, 124–125
oil-in-water, 121, 123–124
oil-in-water-in-oil, 124–125
water-in-cyclomethicone, 125
water-in-oil, 121, 124
water-in-oil-in-water, 124–125
water-in-silicone, 125
water-soluble ointment bases, 125
Encapsulation systems, for topical applications
cyclodextrins, 792
liquid crystals, 793
microemulsions, 792–793
microparticles, 787–788
multiple emulsions, 793
nanoemulsions, 791
nanoparticles, 788–791
overviews, 787
vesicles, 791–792
Endocrine aging, 237–239
Enoxacin1, 803
Environmental aging, 236–237
Environmental factors, skin sensitivity, 70
Environmental impact, on skin hydration, 97–98
Environmentally sensitive skin, 60
Environmental Working Group (EWG), 840
Enzyme inhibition, 185
EO. See Ethoxy group (EO)
EO/PO block polymers, 780–781
Eosinophils, in rosacea type skin, 34
EpiDerm1, 541
Epidermal changes, aging, 626
Epidermal keratinocytes
role in inflammation of ICD, 444
skin hydration, 31
Epidermal melanin unit, 543
Epidermis
baby vs adult skin, 613
normal skin, 6
schematic diagram, 92
skin irritation prediction, 532–535
stratum corneum, 91–96
water-soluble constituents, 216
EpiSkin1, 541
EPR. See Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
ERK2. See Extracellular signal-related kinase 2
Erythema, 332, 494
Erythrokeratoderma variabilis (EKV), 167
ESCA. See Electron spectroscopy for chemical
analysis
Escherichia coli, 335
ESR. See Electron spin resonance (ESR)
spectroscopy, hair
Esterases, 543
inhibitors
triethylcitrate, 645
zinc glycinate, 645
Esterified quaternaries, 778
Esters, 782–784
carboxylates, 770
comedogenic scores of, 584
Estradiol partition coefficient, polymers effect, 811
Ethanol, 185
Ethers, 780–781
carboxylates, 770–771
Ethics, in human testing
cosmetic products testing, 813–814
human safety tests, 814–817
Ethnicity
aging and, 237, 292
friction coefficient and, 419–420
and skin sensitivity, 65–67
Ethoquats. See Ethoxylated quaternaries
Ethosomes, 802–803
7-ethoxycoumarin-O-deethylase (ECOD), 543
Ethoxy-diglycol solution, 745
Ethoxy group (EO), 771
Ethoxylated alcohols, 770
Ethoxylated alkylamines, 778
Ethoxylated derivatives, 783
Ethoxylated fats, 781
Ethoxylated fatty acids, 782
Ethoxylated glycerides, 360
Ethoxylated mono and diglycerides, 360
Ethoxylated oils, 781
Ethoxylated/propoxylated fatty alcohols, 361
Ethoxylated quaternaries, 693
Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA), 198
EU. See European union
EU Council Directive 93/35/EEC, 813
Europe, regulation of UV filters, 313
European Center for the Validation of Alternative
Methods (ECVAM), 345, 539, 541
European Chemicals Agency (EChA), 831
European Commission (EC), 683
European Committee for Standardization, 326
European Economic Community Directive, 342
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), 832
European Union (EU) legislation, 825–835
animal testing ban, 828
annexes to cosmetics directive, 827–828
definition, 825
horizontal regulations, 833–835
on aerosol dispensers, 835
for animal protection, 833–834
General Product Safety Directive (GPSD), 834
on nominal quantities for skin care, 834–835
on prepackaged products, 834–835
impact on US cosmetics industry, 841–842
852
Index

=== Page 870 ===
[European Union (EU) legislation]
public information prerequisite, 826–827
recast proposal, 828–830
safety prerequisite and responsibilities, 825
SCC(NF)P, 827–828
technical information file (TIF) prerequisite,
826–827
vertical regulations, 830–832
Biocidal Products Directive, 832
Dangerous Preparations Directive,
831–832
Dangerous Substances Directive, 830–831
on detergents, 832
on food additives, 832
Legislation on Medical Devices, 832
Medicinal Products Directive, 832
REACH, 830–831
Evaporimeter, 499
Evaporimetry, 167
EVOO. See Extra virgin olive oil
EWG. See Environmental Working Group
(EWG)
Exaggerated immersion test, skin sensitivity, 86
Exfoliant agents, 369
Exfoliation, 627
Experimental gingivitis model, skin inflammation
assessment in, 485–486
Exposed skin, and skin sensitivity, 68
Extracellular matrix (ECM), 325, 331
Extracellular signal-related kinase 2 (ERK2), 351
Extra virgin olive oil (EVOO). See Olive oil
Extrinsic aging, 292–293, 677–678
Eyeliners, 396
Eye makeup products
formulations of, 396
quantitative assessment of properties, 400
Eyeshadows, 396
Face
creams, baby, 618
foundations, 394–395
quantification of properties of, 401–403
raw materials for, 397
makeup. See Face makeup products
Face makeup products
formulation, 394–396
face powders, 395–396
foundations, 394–395
quantitative assessment of properties, 401–404
foundation, 401–403
skin radiance, 403–404
Facial wrinkles, evaluation, 293–294
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (FPLA), 841
Farnesol, 558
Fatty acid
isethionates, 774
mono and diglycerides, 360
Fatty alcohols, 779–780
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Federal cosmetic regulations, US, 839–841
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act (1938), 839
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 841
Fibroblast proliferation, 548, 551
Fibroblasts, 540
Fibronectin, 538
Fick’s law of diffusion, 158, 159
Filaggrin, 93
NMF derived from, 31
Film-forming antiperspirant polymers, 633
Finasteride, 543
Flavonoids, 305, 333
structure, 268
Flexabrasion test, hair, 710–712
Fluorescence spectroscopy, hair, 713
Fluorosurfactants, 785
Flyaway reduction, by silicones, 377
Foaming, by dimethicone copolyols, 377
Fontana–Masson staining, 544
Food additives, EU legislation on, 832
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 1, 121,
192, 325
hydroquinone and, 600
Food and Drug administration (FDA), 631
Four-hour patch test, 475
FPLA. See Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (FPLA)
Fractal analysis, hair, 723–724
Fragrance ingredients, 555–556
labeled substances, 557
Franz-type glass diffusion cells, 201
Fraxel laser, 599
Free radicals, 324
Friction/friction coefficient, of skin, 432–433
Amontons’ law for, 415
anatomic region/age/gender/race, 419–420
defined, 415
experimental designs for measuring, 415–417
factors affecting, 417–424
hydration, 417–419
lubricants/emollients/moisturizers for
measuring, 420–423
normal load, 417
probes measuring, 423–424
Fringe projections analysis, 608
Frosch–Kligman soap chamber patch test, 542
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
Fullerene, 790
Functional silicones, 372–373
GAG. See Glycosaminoglycans (GAG)
Gap junction proteins (GJP), 799
Gender
differences, skin pH, 223
effects on aging, 292
friction coefficient and, 419–420
and skin sensitivity, 65
General Product Safety Directive (GPSD), 834
Gene transcription regulation, antioxidants, 307
GFP. See Green fluorescent protein (GFP)
GH. See Growth hormone (GH)
GHS. See Global harmonization system (GHS)
GJP. See Gap junction proteins (GJP)
Global harmonization system (GHS), 2
b-Glucocerebrosidase activity, 349
Glucocorticoids, 542–543
Index
853

=== Page 871 ===
Glutathione (GSH), 304–305, 306
skin-whitening agents, 590
Glutathione S-transferase (GST), 543
Glycation control techniques
protection against AGE formation, 267–269
protection against glycation consequences,
269–270
Glycation end products
accumulation, in skin, 263–265
consequences
functional, 266–267
structural, 265
formation, 261–262
glycation control techniques, 267–270
glycoxidative aging process, 261
overview, 261
Glyceraldehydes, 339
Glycerin, 107, 110
Glycerol, 94, 99
esters, 783
Glycerolether, 645–646
Glyceryl fatty acid ester, 645
Glycol
esters, 782
ethers, 750
Glycosaminoglycans (GAG), 253, 254, 626,
681–682
Glycoxidative model, skin aging, 262
GPX. See Selenoenzyme glutathione peroxide
Gravitational aging, 239–240
Green fluorescent protein (GFP), 799
Growth hormone (GH), 239
Guar gum. See Cationic guar gum
Guerbet alcohols, 694
Guinea pig immersion assay, 474
Gynoid lipodystrophy. See Cellulite
HA. See Hyaluronic acid (HA)
Hair. See also Hair conditioners
baby care products for, 616–619
baby vs adult skin, 614
cortical cells, 705
cuticle cells, 705
damage, 687–689
dimensions, 705
drying aids, 377
dynamic mechanical analysis, 710–713
bending measurements, 712–713
flexabrasion test, 710–712
torsion measurements, 712–713
graying, 288
luster measurements, 726–729
mechanical fatiguing, 710
microfluorometry, 720
microscopy. See Microscopy, hair
optical properties, 726–729
permanent wave evaluation, 730–731
shaft, 705
shaft moisturization, 147
shine, by phenyl trimethicone, 377
spectroscopy. See Spectroscopy, hair
strengthening, 378
[Hair]
surface analysis
combing, 724–725
electrokinetic measurements, 720–722
fractal analysis, 723–724
permeability analysis, 720–722
profilometry-FT, 723–724
wettability, 722–723
surfaces
chemically treated, 689–690
virgin, 689
tensile properties of
post-yield region, 709
stress/strain curves, 706–707
tensile testers, 709–710
yield region, 708
texture analysis, 725–726
Hair conditioners
commercial, 690–691
conditioning, 687–689
hair fiber surface, 689–690
ingredients of
auxiliary, 698–699
cationic surfactants, 692–694
lipophilic conditioners, 694
polymers, 695
silicones, 376–378, 695–698
Hamamelis, 333
Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology, 2
Headspace analysis, 646
HEC. See Hydroxyethyl cellulose
Hemidesmosomes, 538, 539
Hemoglobin, skin color and, 407
Henna, 749
Herpes zoster, 655
Heterocyclic ammonium salts, 777
Hexyl nicotinate (HN), 166, 653
absorption by appendages, 26–27
chemical structure, 25
clinical study of, 25
comparisons between groups and anatomic
sites, 26–27
description of, 25
skin reactivity to, 27
High-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC), 809
Hispanic skin, 10
Histamine-induced itch human model, 573–576
HLB. See Hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB)
HN. See Hexyl nicotinate (HN)
HNO3. See Nitric acid (HNO3)
Homeostasis, 176–178
Hormonal changes, in cutaneous tissues, 292
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT), 239, 681
Hormones, produced by skin, 238
“Horny layer,” skin. See Stratum corneum
Host factors, skin sensitivity
age, 68
anatomical sites
exposed skin, 68
vulva, 68–70
cultural factors, 70
environmental factors, 70
854
Index

=== Page 872 ===
[Host factors, skin sensitivity]
ethnicity, 65–67
gender, 65
HP. See Hydroxypropyl
HPLC. See High-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC)
HPT. See Human patch test (HPT)
HRIPT. See Human repeated insult patch tests
(HRIPT)
HRT. See Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
Human antioxidant defense system, components
of, 678
Human axilla, sweat glands in, 631
Human experimental models, 471
Human maximization test, 816
Human patch test (HPT), 518, 525–526, 529–530
Human repeated insult patch tests (HRIPT), 816
Human safety tests
ethical considerations, 814–815
irritance assessment, 816
Notes of Guidance, 815
predictive allergenicity tests, 816–817
prerequisites, 815
requirements, minimal, 817
sensitization potential assessment, 816
Human vs. animal skin, 169
Humectants, 127, 362–363, 746
amino acids, 114–115
butylene glycol, 109
chemical formulas of, 108
conditioners ingredients, 699
glycerin, 107, 110
hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid), 111
lactic acid, 111–112
moisture-binding ability at various humidity,
109
panthenol, 112–113
PCA, 113
propylene glycol, 114
proteins, 114–115
sorbitol, 115
urea, 115–116
Hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid), 111
Hyaluronic acid (HA), 161
skin aging and, 37
skin hydration and, 31, 33
Hydrating substances, 107–116. See also
Humectants
amino acids, 114–115
butylene glycol, 109
creams and lotions, 122–125
glycerin, 107, 110
hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid), 111
lactic acid, 111–112
panthenol, 112–113
PCA, 113
propylene glycol, 114
proteins, 114–115
sorbitol, 115
urea, 115–116
Hydration, 279
dysfunctional skin, 161–162
measurements, photoaging, 294
Hydroalcoholic pump sprays, 648
Hydrocortisone, anti-itch testing, 575
Hydrogenated tallow octyl dimonium chloride, 694
Hydrolipidic film, 5, 434
Hydrolipidic layer, 432, 614
Hydrolyzates, 365
Hydrophilic lipids, 360–361
Hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB), 122–123, 780
Hydrophobic compounds, 540–541
Hydrophobic emollients, 360
Hydrophobic fatty acid esters, 359
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance, skin
wettability, 429
data analysis, 430
Hydrophobicity, 692–693
Hydroquinone, 544
pigmentation disorders’ treatment, 599
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and, 600
skin-whitening agent, 587–589
Hydroxy acids, 296
Hydroxycitronellal, 531
Hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC), 367, 698
Hydroxypropyl (HP), 366
Hygroscopic substances. See also Humectants
chemistry of, 108
Hyperaemia, post-occlusive cutaneous reactive,
511
Hyperkeratotic dermatoses, 145–146
Hypoallergenic products, 559
Hypodermis
baby and adult skin, 614
normal skin, 7
Hypothesized mechanism, capsaicin-induced
analgesia, 655
ICCR. See International Committee on Cosmetic
Regulations (ICCR)
ICD. See Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD)
IL 8, 542
Imidazoline, 776
Immersion tests, 476
irritant effects of detergent, 476
Immune function, 678–679
Impedance properties, 822
Imperceptible perspiration, 144
Individual UV filters, 316
Infant skin, 160, 161
Infection defense, baby and adult skin, 616
Inflammation, 679
Inflammatory mediators
cellophane tape adsorption of, 481–482
sebutape adsorption of
cytokine levels, sun-exposed vs. unexposed
skin, 484
in EG model, 485–486
IL-1ra/IL-1a ratio, 482–483, 485
Inflammatory skin reactions
skin tape application methods for assessing
mRNA fragments, 487
structural proteins, 486
surface assessment and grading of, 481
Index
855

=== Page 873 ===
Infrared (IR) spectroscopy, hair, 713–714
Infrared radiation (IRR), 331
defined, 323
protection against, 325, 327
skin effects of, 324–325
wavelength ranges in, 323
Insect repellent, cooling compounds as, 670
Instron1 tensile tester, 709
Integrating sphere spectrophotometry, hair, 715–716
Integrins, 538
Intensive treatment conditioners, 690
Intercellular lipids, interaction with surfactants, 457
Interference pigments, 128
Interleukin (IL) 1a, 541, 542
International Committee on Cosmetic Regulations
(ICCR), 842
International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and
Handbook, 339
International Nomenclature of Cosmetic
Ingredients (INCI), 826, 830
Intrinsic aging, 291–292, 625, 677
vs. photoaging, 235
Invisible dermatoses, 481
In vitro methods, for skin protection, 197–198, 201
In vivo methods
cosmetic materials testing, 471
for skin protection, 198–201
Ionic surfactants, 775–778
amphoteric surfactants, 778–779
anionic surfactants, 769–775
cationic surfactants, 775–778
Iontophoresis, 183
IRR. See Infrared radiation
Irregularity skin index (ISI), 88
Irritance assessment, human safety tests, 816
Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD), 42, 509–515
acneiform, 439, 448
acute, 437–438, 447
delayed, 438, 447
airborne, 440
asteatotic irritant eczema, 440
chronic, 438–439
clinical classification, 437–440, 447–449
clinical manifestation, 445
cumulative, 448
epidemiology, 445–447
friction dermatitis, 440
irritant reaction, 438, 447–448
non-erythematous/suberythematous irritation,
439, 448
subjective/sensory irritation, 439–440, 448–449
traumatic, 439, 448
traumiterative, 448
Irritant dermatitis
classification of, 472
clinical features of, 471
Irritant reaction, ICD, 438, 447–448
Irritant reactivity tests, sensitive skin, 63–64
Irritation
Asian vs Caucasian, 511–514
black vs Caucasian, 509–511
genital vs. upper arm skin, 505–507
suberythematous, 439
ISI. See Irregularity skin index (ISI)
Isoelectric point, 689
Isopropyl dibenzoylmethane, 558
Itching. See Pruritus
KC. See Keratinocytes
a-Keratin filaments, 739
Keratin, 6, 174, 741
and buffering capacity of skin, 216
granulation, nail, 753
Keratinization
disorders, 167
nail, 740
normal skin, 6–7
Keratinized squamous cells, 275
Keratinized vs nonkeratinized vulval skin
sensitivity, 69
Keratinocytes (KC), 6, 91, 174, 346
Keratotic/pigmented tumors, 146–147
Kligman formula, 598–599
Koebner phenomenon, 760
Kojic acid, 589–590
L595, elastic vesicles, 800
Labia major, 505
Labia minora, 505
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 347, 542
Lactic acid, 111–112
for skin sensitivity test, 85
Lamellar lipid
arrangement, 96
water permeability, 96
Laminin, 538
Langerhans cells, 548, 740
Lanolin, 361, 781
fatty acid, 361
LAS. See Linear alkylbenzene sulfonate (LAS)
Laser Doppler flowmeter (LDF), 25, 166, 170
Laser Doppler imaging system, cellulite
evaluation, 607
Laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV)
for blood flow, 45–46
for skin sensitivity, 64, 87
Laser excitation source and optics for measurement
of skin hydration, 154–155
Laser therapy, pigmentation disorders, 599
Lateral force microscopy (LFM), hair, 718–719
Lateral torsion method, 821
Laurtrimonium chloride, 693
LDF. See Laser Doppler flowmeter (LDF)
LDH. See Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
LDV. See Laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV)
Leave-in conditioners, 690
Leave-on products, 555
Lecithin, 361–362
Legislation on Medical Devices, 832
Leukonychia, 748
LFM. See Lateral force microscopy (LFM), hair
Light-cured gels, 758–760
Linear alkylbenzene sulfonate (LAS), 773
Lipid hydroperoxide (LPO), 349
856
Index

=== Page 874 ===
Lipids, 745
stratum corneum, 94
structure, and skin, 253–258
Lipodystrophy, gynoid. See Cellulite
Lipoic acid, 306
Lipophilic conditioners, 694
Lipophilic emollients, 359–360
Lipophilic ingredients, 634
Lipopolypeptides, 297
Liposomes, 185
Lipstick
formulation of, 392–393
quantitative assessment of properties of,
399–400
color/brightness/streakiness, 399
moisturizing effect, 399–400
Liquid crystals, for topical applications, 793
Loricrin and SPRR2, 539
Low ethoxylates triglycerides, 360
Low-molecular-weight polyethylene glycols, 363
L-phenylalanine, 175
LPO. See Lipid hydroperoxide
L-tyrosine, 175
Lubricants, friction coefficient of skin, 420–423
Luster measurements, hair, 726–729
Lyotropic liquid crystals, 633
MacroDermTM, 809
Macular interfollicular subclinical melanoderma,
285
Magnesium, 548
Magnesium-L-ascorbyl-2-phosphate (VC-PMG),
590
Magnesium lauryl sulfate [Mg(LS)2], 771
Magnetic resonance imaging, cellulite evaluation,
608
Maillard reaction, 340
Makeup products. See Decorative products
Malassezia, 145
Manicure
buffing, 747
cuticle removers, 745–747
cutting, 745
daily care, 747–748
exceptional effects of, 749
filling, 745
nail polish remover, 745
pumicing, 745
unwanted effects of, 748–749
whitening, 747
Mannitol, 540–541
Margin of safety (MoS) approach, 616
Mascaras
evaluation of curving and lengthening power
of, 400
formulation, 396
“Mask of pregnancy.” See Melasma
MAT. See Moisture accumulation test
Mathematical optical model construction, skin,
275–276
Matricial-interstitial unit’s alterations, cellulite
etiology, 605
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), 236, 325, 331,
679
McGill Pain Questionnaire, 577
MEA. See Multiple endpoint analysis
Mean gray level (MGL), 141
Mechanical fatiguing, of hair, 710
MED. See Minimal erythemal doses
Medicinal Products Directive, 832
Medium ethoxylates lanolin alcohols, 361
Mehylnicotinate (MN), 653
Melanin, 175, 597
pigmentation, 678
skin color and, 407
Melanin-stimulating hormone (MSH), 544
Melanocytes, 740, 741
Melanoderma, 283–285
Melanoidins, 341, 342
Melanosomes, 11, 543–544
of ethnic races, 50–52
Melasma, 597–598
Menstrum, 133
Mentha arvensis, 661, 664
Mentha piperita, 664
Menthol
anti-itch testing, 574
background, 661–662
chemistry, 663–664
cooling agents related to, 664–666
major Impurities in, 664
menthoxy-related coolants, 665
natural, 664
stereoisomers of, 663
synthetic, 664
vs. cooling strengths, 669
Menthol ethylene glycol carbonate (MGC), 664
Menthol propylene glycol carbonate (MPC), 664
Menthoxy-related coolants, 665
Menthyl anthanilate, 317
Menthyl 3-hydroxybutyrate (MHB), 666
Mercapto-silanol complex, 745
Metabolism, 349
Metal oxides, odor-quenching deodorants, 644–645
Methacrylic acid-containing primers, 764
2-methacryloyloxethylphosphorylcholine polymer
(pMPC), 161
Methemoglobinemia, 764
Methionine sulfoxide, 340
Methyl (chloro)isothia-zolinone, 554
3-methylcholanthrene, 543
MGC. See Menthol ethylene glycol carbonate
MGL. See Mean gray level
[Mg(LS)2]. See Magnesium lauryl sulfate [Mg(LS)2]
MHB. See Menthyl 3-hydroxybutyrate
Microbial contamination, 126
Microcomedones, 287
Microemulsions
pump sprays, 649
for topical applications, 792–793
Microencapsulation, 787
Microflora, 225, 226, 643
Microfluorometry, hair, 720
Microparticles, for topical applications, 787–788
Micropigmentary sunblocks, 317, 318
Index
857

=== Page 875 ===
Microrelief, skin
evaluation, 293–294
using ULEV method, 285–286
Microscopy, hair
AFM, 718–719
confocal, 719–720
LFM, 718–719
optical, 717
SEM, 717–718
SPM, 718
Microvascular sensitivity, 654
Miliaria, 620
Minerals, 680–681
Miniemulsion. See Nanoemulsions
Minimal erythemal dose (MED), 326, 350
Mixed skin, 9
MMP. See Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)
MMP-1 (collagenase), 307
MMS. See Monomenthyl succinate
MN. See Mehylnicotinate
Modified maximum average scores (MMAS), 538
Moisture accumulation test (MAT), 137–138
Moisture-binding ability
of humectants, at various humidity, 109
Moisturizers, 295, 333
and friction coefficient of skin, 420–423
Moisturizing
and lipstick, 399–400
skin, 159–160
Molecular photoprotective agents, 335–336
Monoalkyl quaternaries, 693
Monoesters, 543, 770
disodium salts, 773
Monoglycerides, 360
Monomenthyl succinate (MMS), 664
Mosaic subclinical melanoderma (MSM), 283–285
depigmented skin, 289
Mouse ear model, 474–475
MPC. See Menthol propylene glycol carbonate
MSM. See Mosaic subclinical melanoderma
MTT. See 3-[4,5-dimethyl-thiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl
tetrazolium bromide (MTT)
Mucondialdehyde, 343
Multiple emulsions, 124–125
for topical applications, 793
Multiple endpoint analysis (MEA), 347
patch test
HPT chemicals, 529–530
PVS chemicals, 528–529
topical test
HPT chemicals, 525–526
PVS chemicals, 523–524
N-acetyl glucosamine (NAG), 591
NAD. See National Advertising Division (NAD)
NAD(P)H:quinone reductase (NQR), 543
NaHCO3. See Sodium bicarbonate
Nail
allergic reactions, 762–764
anatomy, 737
artificial. See Artificial nails
buffing, 747
[Nail]
daily care, 747-748
esthetic role, 742
histology, 737–741
makeup products
formulations of, 393–394
quantitative assessment of properties of, 404
nonallergic reactions, 761–762
physicochemistry, 741–742
physiology, 742
plate, 737–739
polish. See Nail polish
prosthesis, 765
varnishes, 751–752
whitening, 747
Nail polish
advantage, 753
composition, 749–751
hospital, 754
hypoallergenic, 752
nail varnishes, 751–752
quick drying, 752
remover, 745
unwanted effects, 753–754
use, 752
water based, 752
Nalfurafine, anti-itch testing, 577
N-alkyl amino acids, 779
N-alkyltrimethyl ammonium salts, 776
Nanocapsules, 789
Nanoemulsions, for topical applications, 791
Nanoparticles, for topical applications, 788–791
Nanospheres, 789
Nasolabial fold, and skin sensitivity, 63
National Advertising Division (NAD), 840
National Formulary (NF), 124
National Rosacea Society, 34
Natural menthol, 664
Natural moisturizing factors (NMF), 8, 31, 92–94,
107, 127, 159, 177, 363
NCS. See Noncontact SIAscopy (NCS)
Near infrared spectroscopy (NIR), hair, 715
Neoagarobiose, 591
Nerve growth factor (NGF), 655
Neuroendocrine receptors, in skin, 238
Neurophysiology, SPSS, 75–80
Neuroreceptors, surfactants and, 458
Neurotransmitters, produced by skin, 238
Neutralization, 694
NF. See National Formulary
NGF. See Nerve growth factor
Nicotinate occlusion test, skin sensitivity, 85
Nicotinates, 654
Niosomes, 185
NIR. See Near infrared spectroscopy (NIR), hair
Nitric acid (HNO3), 749
Nitroxide probes, for EPR, 207–208
NMF. See Natural moisturizing factor (NMF)
N,N-dimethyl-p-toluidine, 764
Nonallergic reactions, nail, 761–762
Noncontact SIAscopy (NCS), 279–280
Non-erythematous irritation. See Suberythematous
irritation
858
Index

=== Page 876 ===
Nonhistaminic itching, 655
Non-hydrocarbon speciality surfactants, 785
Noninvasive bioengineering measurements, for
cellulite, 606–608
Nonionic surfactants, 458, 779–785
alkanolamides, 782
amine oxides, 784–785
esters, 782–784
ethers, 780–781
fatty alcohols, 779–780
Nonirritating, 489
Nonphospholipid-based elastic vesicles, 800–802
Nonspecific cation channels (NSCC), 175
Non-surfactant compounds, 538. See also
Surfactants
Normal skin, 6–7
Notes of Guidance, human safety tests, 815
NQR. See NAD(P)H:quinone reductase (NQR)
NSCC. See Nonspecific cation channels (NSCC)
Nucleoskeletal proteins, 540
Nutritional complements, sun protection with, 328
Oatmeal, 99
Occlusive agents, 127
Occlusive emollients, 359–360
Occlusive patches, 475
Octocrylene, 316
Odor-inhibiting precursor mimics, 646
Odor-masking deodorants, 644
Odor-neutralizing deodorants, 644
Odor-quenching deodorants
metal oxides, 644–645
zinc ricinoleate, 644
O-D parameter, skin care for, 32–33
Oil-in-water, 332
emulsions, 340, 690
Oil-in-water-in-oil (O/W/O) emulsions, 124–125
Oil-in-water (O/W)
micro-emulsion gel, 638
Oil-in-water (O/W) emulsions, 121, 123–124,
635–636
Oily skin, 5, 9
sebum secretion, 32
vs. dry skin, 29–32
Oleic acid/glycerol monolaurate, 633
Oleochemistry, 769
Olive oil, 335
Onychocorneal band, 737
Onychocytes, 737
Onycholysis, 747
Open comedones, 287
Optical microscopy, hair, 717
Optical pathways, in skin, 408
Optical properties, hair, 726–729
Oral cosmetics, 677–683
active compounds in. See Active compounds, in
oral cosmetics
aim of, 677–679
antiaging, 297
antiaging products, 297
legislation concerning, 683
Oral treatments, for cellulite, 609
Orange staining of nail plate, 753
Orangewood stick, 746
Order parameter calculation, EPR, 210–212
conventional, 210
simulated and conventional, 211–212
by slow-motional EPR simulation, 210–211
Organic solvents, 745
OTC. See Over-the-counter
Over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, 631, 672
Over-the-counter (OTC) moisturizers, 33
O/W. See Oil-in-water
O/W/O emulsions. See Oil-in-water-in-oil
emulsions
Oxidative hair dyes, 557
Oxidative stress, 301
and Photoprotection, 348
Oximetry, 754
PABA. See Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA)
Panthenol, 112–113
Papillae, 626
Papillary dermis, 7
PAR-2. See Protease-activated receptor-2
Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), 316, 558
Paraffin wax, 360
Paraphenylenediamine (PPD), 557
Partition coefficient (PC) SC/water, polymers
effect
materials, 809–810
methods, 809–810
overview, 809
results, 810–811
Patch test
dermatological clinic data, 565–567
irritant properties of material, 489
upper arms and lower forearms, 490, 491–492
PBS. See Phosphatebuffered saline
PCA. See Pyrrolidone carboxylic acid (PCA)
PCPC. See Personal Care Products Council (PCPC)
Pearson correlation, 534
Peelings, 627
PEG. See Polyethylene glycol
PEG-7 glyceryl cocoate, 360
PEG-8-L, elastic vesicles, 801
Pendant organic groups, 371–372
Penetration enhancement
biochemical, 185
chemical, 185
physical, 183–184
Peptide, 130
Percentage water resistance retention (%WRR), 327
Percutaneous absorption, 165
compound used to measure, 170
corelation with TEWL, 165–168
qualitative reasoning for, 170–171
measurement methods, 169–170
Perifollicular dots, of subclinical melanoderma, 284
Permeability
analysis, hair, 720–722
of silicones, 375
Personal care products, skin hydration and, 98–99
Personal Care Products Council (PCPC), 839, 842
Index
859

=== Page 877 ===
Petrolatum, 99, 160, 477
comedogenic scores, 585
pH, 222
according to age, 16
in ethnic races, 12, 49
incidence of sites, 18
influence of sex, 14
PHA. See Polyhydroxy acids
Pharmacokinetic parameters, baby and adult
skin, 615
Phase inversion temperature (PIT), 649
Phenylbenzimadazole sulfonic acid, 316
Phenyl trimethicones, 373
Phosphatebuffered saline (PBS), 201
Phosphates esters, 774–775
acyl glutamates, 775
acyl peptides, 775
Phospholipid elastic vesicles, 798
ethosomes, 802–803
transfersomes, 799
Phospholipids, 747
Photoaging, 236–237, 291, 678
objective evaluations of, 293–294
Photodamage, of skin
in ethnic races, 53–54
Photography, skin radiance, 409
Photoirritation, 440
Photolyases, 335
Photooxidative stress, antagonists of, 335
Photoplethysmography (PPG), 510
Photostability, 324
Phototoxicity, 440
Phototype aging, 237
PHSC. See Powdered human stratum corneum
(PHSC)
Physical blockers, UV filters, 317–318
Physical penetration enhancement, 183–184
Physiotherapy
for cellulite, 608–609
revulsive products in, 656–658
Phytoestrogens, 681
Phytophotodermatitis, 440
Pig ear test, 518
Pigmentation, 348, 597–599
alternative whitening agents, 601
regulatory updates for treatment agents, 600
Tri-Luma for treating, 599–600
Pigments, 750
in decorative products, 391–392
Pilosebaceous, 144
PIPA. See Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation
PIT. See Phase inversion temperature
PIT-emulsion pump sprays, 649
Plant extracts
anticellulite products, 609
used in commerical antiaging products, 297
Plant polyphenols. See Flavonoids
Plant Protection Directive, 832, 833
Plasticizers, 750
Plastic occlusion stress test (POST),
138–139
p-menthane, carboxamide coolants, 668
PNF. See Proximal nail fold (PNF)
Polarized light-enhanced visual scores, 383–386
Polarized light photography, radiance/
complexion, 409
Polarized light visualization system, skin irritation
assessment by
BTK testing, 490–491
burning sensations, 494
cross-polarized light, 494–495
enhanced visual grading, 491–494
feminine protection products, 493
milder patch conditions, 495
patch tested with SLS, 494
skin conditions, 494
subjects, 490
test designs, 489
test materials for, 489
upper arms and lower forearms, 490
visual grading, 493, 494, 495–496
Polyamides, 698
Polybarrier technology, 633
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). See Dimethicones
Polyethylene glycol (PEG), 121
Polyethylene glycol (PEG)-2 cocomonium
chloride, 693
Polyhydroxy acids (PHA), 333
Polymers, 129–130, 695
alkyl quaternary cellulose, 367
film-forming antiperspirant, 633
hydrophobicity of, 363
incubation, 810
molecular weight of, 363
natural
cationic cellulose derivatives, 367
cationic guar gum, 366–367
chemically modified protein derivatives,
365–366
proteins, 364–365
positive charge density of, 363
synthetic quaternized, 367–368
Polymethylcyclosiloxanes, 362
Polyphenolic compounds, 681
Polyphenols, 305
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), 682–683
Polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP), 365
Pomade acne, 439
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, 598
Post-inflammatory pigment alteration (PIPA). See
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation
Post-occlusive cutaneous reactive hyperaemia, 511
Potassium, 548
hydroxide, 745
Powdered human stratum corneum (PHSC),
809–811
Powders
baby, 618–619
face, 395–396
raw materials for, 397
and friction coefficient, 421
PPD. See Paraphenylenediamine (PPD)
PPG. See Photoplethysmography (PPG)
Pramoxine, anti-itch testing, 574
Predictive allergenicity tests, human safety,
816–817
860
Index

=== Page 878 ===
Predictive tests
on animals, 567–568
on human volunteers, 567–568
Prednicarbamate (PC), 543
Prednilosone, 541
Prepackaged products, EU legislation on, 834–835
Preservatives, 556–557
conditioners ingredients, 698
system, 126
Pre-validation study (PVS) chemicals, 518, 523–524,
528–529
PRIMOS1 system, 294
Proanthocyanidins, 681
Procyanidins, 305, 681
Prodrug molecules, 185
Product/skin-mediated perfume transformations,
646
Profilometry, of skin relief, 410
Profilometry-FT analysis, hair, 723–724
Propionibacteria, 227
Propionibacterium acnes, 34
Propoxylated lanolin alcohols, 361
Propylene glycol, 114
Propyl gallate, 557
Prostaglandins, 173–174, 471, 542
Protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR-2), 348
Proteins, 114–115
collagen, 244, 245–247
elastin, 244–250
natural polymers, 364–365
protein structure, 250–252
structure, skin, 250–252
Provocative use tests (PUT), 566
Proximal nail fold (PNF), 737, 746
Pruritus, 573
anti-itch testing, 573–579
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 647, 764
Psoralen-UVA (PUVA), 342
Psoriasis, 145–146
psoriasis vulgaris, 547, 548, 551
Psoriasis area and severity index (PASI), 547
Psychophysical tests, of skin, 75
PUFA. See Polyunsaturated fatty acids
Pump sprays, deodorants
hydroalcoholic, 648
microemulsion, 649
PIT-emulsion, 649
PUT. See Provocative use tests (PUT)
PUVA. See Psoralen-UVA
PVP. See Polyvinyl pyrrolidone
PVP-protein copolymers, 365–366
PVS chemicals. See Pre-validation study (PVS)
chemicals
Pycnogenol, 601, 681
Pyrrolidone carboxylic acid (PCA), 363
Q18B. See Quaternium-18 bentonite gels
QST. See Quantitative sensory testing (QST)
Quantitation, of cutaneous thermal sensation,
84–85
Quantitative hydration evaluation, 822
Quantitative sensory testing (QST), 84
Quaternary ammonium compounds, 692
alkyl betaines, 777
heterocyclic ammonium salts, 777
quaternized APG, 777–778
tetra alkyl ammonium salts, 776–777
Quaternium-18 bentonite (Q18B) gels, 198
Quaternized protein hydrolyzates, 366
Quats. See Quaternary ammonium compounds
Quenchers, 335
Questice, 670
Rabbit, comedogenicity in, 583–586
Racemization. See Aspartic acid racemization
(AAR)
Racial differences, in skin properties, 67
Raman effect, qualitative description of the,
152, 154
Raman methods for the study of hydration of the
skin
relationship between the Raman spectrum of
skin and the local water concentration,
156–158
validation of the quantitative in vivo water
concentration measurement, 158
water concentration gradients and measurement
of the stratum corneum thickness,
158–159
Raman microspectroscopy, applications of
hydration effects in dysfunctional skin, 161–162
moisturizing the skin, 159–160
water distribution in the skin for different skin
types, 160–161
Raman spectra, in-vivo, 154–156, 162
Raman spectrometer for measurement of skin
hydration, 155
Raman spectroscopy, hair, 713–714
Raman spectrum of skin and the local water
concentration, relationship between,
156–158
Raynaud’s phenomenon, 740
RBC glutathione peroxidase, 551
RCS. See Reactive carbonyl species (RCS)
REACH. See Registration, Evaluation, and
Authorization of Chemicals (REACH)
Reactive carbonyl species (RCS), 261
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 175, 261, 293, 324,
331, 625, 678
in skin inflammation, 37
Reactive skin, 60
Reactivity-based approaches, 335
Reconstituted human skin (RHS) models, 345
deleterious effects of solar radiation/sunscreen
efficacy testing, 350–352
histological section of, 347
research on, 346–347
Reconstructed human epidermis (RHE), 345
Reconstructed skin equivalents
barrier function and penetration, 540–541
melanocytes, studies with, 543–544
pharmacotoxicology, 542–543
skin equivalents, 539–540
Refatteners, 358
Index
861

=== Page 879 ===
Refattening additives. See Refatteners
Refractive index (RI), 129
Registration, Evaluation, and Authorization of
Chemicals (REACH), 830–831, 842
Regression method, for testing skin hydration, 135
Repeated exposure occlusive irritation test
(ROIT), 200
Repeated open application tests (ROAT), 566, 816
Repetitive irritation test (RIT), 198, 474
Resistant skin vs. sensitive skin, 33–34
Resveratol, 296
Rete pegs, 128
Reticular dermis, 7
Retinoic acid, 130
Retinoids, 296
anticellulite products, 609
Retinol, 679
Reviscometer1, 294
Revulsive products, 653–658
capsaicin, 654–655
clinical applications, 653
nicotinates, 654
nonclinical applications, 653
used in physiotherapy and sport, 656–658
RHE. See Reconstructed human epidermis
Rheology modification, by silicones, 376
RHS. See Reconstituted human skin
RI. See Refractive index
Rinse-off products, 555
Risk assessment, baby care products, 617
RIT. See Repetitive irritation test
ROAT. See Repeated open application tests (ROAT)
ROIT. See Repeated exposure occlusive irritation
test
Roll-ons, antiperspirant
clear hydroalcoholic, 637
O/W emulsion, 637
O/W micro-emulsion gel, 638
suspension, 638
W/O emulsion, 637
W/Si (water-in-silicone) emulsion, 637
ROS. See Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
Rosacea type, sensitive skin, 34
Rubefacient, 653
Safe Cosmetics Act (2005), of California, 841
Salicylates, 316
Salicylic acid, 540, 592
Santolite1, 749
Sarcosinates, 775
SBCs. See Sunburn cells
SC. See Stratum corneum; Stratum corneum (SC)
Scaliness, skin surface
evaluation using ULEV method, 285–286
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), hair, 717–718
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM), hair, 718
Scarification index, 476
SCCP. See Scientific Committee on Consumer
Products
SCI. See Skin capacitance imaging
Scientific Committee on Consumer Products
(SCCP), 325, 346, 827–828
SCOPE. See Synergistic combinations of
penetration enhancers (SCOPE)
Scopolamine, 192
Scratch behavior measurement, 576
Scrubbing products, 455
Sculptured nails, 763
technique, 755–757
SD. See Standard deviation (SD)
SDS. See Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
Seawater
application on inflamed skin, 547
composition at 3.5% salinity, 548
effects on inflammed skin, 549–550
therapy, 547–551
Sebaceous glands, baby vs. adult, 614
Seborrheic production
according to sites, 19
in ethnic races, 13
incidence of sexes, 15
Sebum, 9
contribution to buffering capacity of skin,
215–216
excretion, 286–288
secretion
in ethnic races, 49
from oily skin, 32
SED. See Standard erythemal dose
Selenoenzyme glutathione peroxide (GPX), 678
Selenoproteins, 551
Self-perceived sensitive skin (SPSS)
neurophysiology, by fMRI, 75–80
brain pattern analysis, 76–80
overview, 75
tests, 75–76
SELS (surface evaluation of living skin) method,
286
SEM. See Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), hair
Sensitive skin, 33–35. See also Skin irritation
acne type, 34
allergic type, 35
classification
cosmetically sensitive skin, 60
delicate skin, 60
environmentally sensitive skin, 60
reactive skin, 60
stingers, 60
very sensitive skin, 60
clinical methods
dermal function tests, 64
irritant reactivity tests, 63–64
sensory reactivity tests, 60–63
defined, 59–60
evaluation methods, 61–62
host factors
age, 68
anatomical sites, 68–70
cultural factors, 70
environmental factors, 70
ethnicity, 65–67
gender, 65
overview, 59
peculiar case, 9
questionnaire, 823
862
Index

=== Page 880 ===
[Sensitive skin]
racial differences, 67
rosacea type, 34
sensitive versus resistant skin, 33–34
sensory responses, 65
sensory testing methods. See Sensory testing
methods, sensitive skin
stinging type, 34–35
tests, 75–76, 83–88
bioengineering tests, 86–88
overview, 83
sensory testing methods, 84–86
vs. resistant skin, 33–34
Sensitivity reactions, UV filters, 318–319
Sensitization potential assessment, human testing,
816
Sensory effects of irritation
DAP of, 386
polarized light-enhanced visual scores of,
383–386
unaided visual scores of, 382–383
Sensory reactivity tests, sensitive skin, 60–63
Sensory responses, in sensitive skin, 65
Sensory/subjective irritation, 339–340, 448–449
Sensory testing methods, sensitive skin
exaggerated immersion test, 86
itching response evaluation, 85–86
nicotinate occlusion test, 85
sodium lauryl sulfate occlusion test, 85
stringing test, 85
thermal sensory testing, 84–85
washing test, 86
Sepigel, 698
Serratia marcescens, 764
Sertaconazole nitrate, anti-itch testing, 577
SFE. See Surface free energy (SFE) (gs)
SG. See Stratum granulosum (SG)
Shampoos
baby, 617–618
2-in-1, 697–698
Shea butter, 334
SIAscans, 277
SIAscopy. See Spectrophotometric intracutaneous
analysis (SIAscopy)
Side effects, cosmetics, 813
SIFT. See Skin irritation function test (SIFT)
Silicones, 695–698
acrylate copolymers, 373
in antiperspirant and deodorant products, 378
blends, 372
chemical structure of, 372
conditioning properties of, 696–697
in cosmetics/toiletries industry, 372–373
cyclomethicone, 697
derivatives, 362
functional, 372–373
2-in-1 shampoos, 697–698
longer-lasting permanent wave and coloring
products, 378
pendant organic groups, 371–372
reasons for use in skin care products, 373–376
cleansing effect, 375–376
emolliency, 373–374
[Silicones
reasons for use in skin care products]
enhanced efficacy, 375
flexibility in formulation, 376
permeability, 375
protection, 375
rheology modification, 376
substantivity, 374
siloxane backbone, 371
used for hair strengthening, 378
used in hair care products, 376–378
Silicon image sensor (SIS), 141
Siloxane backbone, 371
Silybum marianu, 681
Silymarin, 681
Single-application patch testing, 475
Single-chain aliphatic spin probes, EPR, 208–209
Single solarsimulated radiation (SSR), 350
SIS. See Silicon image sensor
Six fragrance allergens
clinical patch testing, 563
diagnostic patch tests, 564–565
false-positive reactions, 563
linked to specific consumer product, 567
scoring system, 567, 568
SKALP, 539
Skin. See also Specific entries
absorption, 349
acidic character and buffer capacity, 215–218
aging. See Skin aging
barrier function and penetration, 540–541
barrier models, 95–96
biophysical characteristics, 10–19
cancers, risk assessment, 289
classifications by types
dry skin, 7–9
mixed skin, 9
normal skin, 6–7
oily skin, 9
sensitive skin, peculiar case, 9
cleanser effects, skin pH, 227–228
color. See Color, of skin
complexion, 407
cosmetological requirements, 5
equivalents, 346–349
applications of, 347–349
research on reconstructed human skin,
346–347
friction/friction coefficient of. See Friction/
friction coefficient, of skin
glycerin, effects on, 110
hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid), effects on, 111
hydration effects, 161–162
hyperpigmentation, 591
infants, 160, 161
infrared radiation, 324–325
lactic acid, effects on, 112
main functions of, 92
measurements, 17
moisturizing, 159–160. See also Raman
microspectroscopy
optical pathways, 408
panthenol, effects on, 113
Index
863

=== Page 881 ===
[Skin]
PCA, effects on, 113
pigmentation, 5, 11
propylene glycol, effects on, 114
seawater and its effects on inflammed, 549–550
sensitivity. See Sensitive skin
surface microrelief, ULEV method, 285–286
surface scaliness, ULEV method, 285–286
ultraviolet radiation, 323–324
urea, effects on, 115
Skin aging, 36–37, 141
catabolic aging, 239
cellular/intrinsic, 36–37
cellular senescence, 234–235
cutaneous, 37
endocrine aging, 237–239
environmental aging, 236–237
ethnic aging, 237
gravitational aging, 239–240
intrinsic aging vs. photoaging, 235
overview, 233
photoaging, 236–237
phototype aging, 237
types, 236
wrinkles, 240
Skin appearance/texture, formulating for
immediate improvement in
emollient esters, 129
interference pigments, 128
polymers, 129–130
soft focus effects, 128–129
Skin capacitance imaging (SCI), 141–147
dermatoglyphics, 141–142
hair shaft moisturization, 147
hyperkeratotic dermatoses, 145–146
keratotic/pigmented tumors, 146–147
skin pores, 144–145
skin surface hydration, 143–144
skin surface patterns, 141
surfactants, 145
Skin care. See also Skin care products
after sun exposition, 332
for O–D parameter, 32–33
Skin care products, 121–133
DHA. See Dihydroxyacetone (DHA)
different types of emulsifiers, 122
different types of emulsions, 121–122
emulsion based, 121
emulsions for aging population, 127–128
formulating effective cosmeceuticals for aging
population, 130–133
formulating for immediate improvement in
appearance and texture, 128–130
formulating hydrating creams and lotions,
122–125
future formulation challenges, 133
interaction with decorative products, 398
preservative systems, 126
silicones used for, 373–376
SkinEthicTM, for skin irritation testing, 517–535
Skin feel agents
anionic, 362–363
criteria of selection of, 358
[Skin feel agents]
emollients/refatteners, 358–362
exfoliating agents, 369
humectants, 362–363
polymers, 363–368
surfactants, 368–369
Skin flora, 221–228
cosmetic effects, 227–228
overview, 221
skin cleanser effects, 227–228
skin pH effects, 226–227
Skin hydration, 29–33, 64. See also Buffer capacity,
of skin; Skin wettability
dietary impact on, 100
electrical changes for, 418–419
environmental impact on, 97–98
in ethnic races, 43–45
friction coefficient and, 417–419
mechanisms of, 91–101
aquaporins, 96
desquamation, 97
stratum corneum, 91–96
tight junctions, 96
oily skin versus dry skin, 29–32
overexposure to water, 99
personal care products and, 98–99
skin care for O–D parameter, 32–33
tests for
bioengineering measurement methods,
135–139
regression method, 135
Skin hydration
laser excitation source and optics for
measurement of, 154–155
measurement of, 151–152. See also Raman
methods
comparison of some methods for, 153
software for measurement of, 155–156
Skin inflammation. See also Skin irritation
protein mediators of
cellophane tape adsorption of, 481–482
sebutape adsorption of, 482–486
reactive oxygen species (ROS) in, 37
techniques to study, 481
Skin interaction, elastic vesicles, 797–798
Skin irritants, 456
Skin irritation. See also Skin inflammation
animal models for testing
bioengineering methods and, 477
Draize rabbit models, 471–474
human models, 475
mouse ear model, 474–475
cell viability measurement, 522
direct topical test, 521, 523–527
due to surfactants
causes of, 455
mechanism of interaction, 457–458
monomers role in, 459
effect of divalent cations on
magnesium, 465
zinc, 465–466
erythema, 494
factors predisposing to cutaneous, 445
864
Index

=== Page 882 ===
[Skin irritation]
histology, 521
IL-1a Release, 522
interaction between MTT and chemicals, 522
molecular mechanisms of, 443–445
epidermal keratinocytes role in inflammation
of, 444
upregulation adhesion molecules, 444
MTT interaction with chemicals, 522, 523
patch test, 521, 527–529
polarized light visualization system to assess
BTK testing, 490–491
cross-polarized light, 494–495
enhanced visual grading, 491–494
individuals’ patch tested with SLS, 494
milder patch conditions, 495
skin conditions, 494
subjects, 490
test materials for, 489
upper arms and lower forearms, 490
visual grading, 493, 494, 495–496
visual scoring and instrumental scoring
methods, comparison between, 495
prediction models, 522
reconstituted human epidermis, 518
statistical analysis, 522
statistical reproducibility, 531–532
test chemical coding, 518
tests to assess, 489
topical test vs. patch test, 529–531
Skin irritation function test (SIFT), 518
Skin microcirculation
assessment of, 407–408
perfusion of, 656
Skin microflora. See Microflora, skin
Skin microrelief
in ethnic races, 46–49
evaluation, 293–294
Skin organ culture (SOC) models, 346
deleterious effects of solar radiation/sunscreen
efficacy testing, 350–352
histological section of, 347
Skin penetration enhancer effects, EPR, 213
Skin pH, 221–228
cosmetic effects, 227–228
effects on skin flora, 226–227
gender differences, 223
origin, 221–222
overview, 221
pH values, 222
protective role, 226
skin cleanser effects, 227–228
Skin photo-adaptation inducers, 335
Skin pigmentation, 35–36
Skin pores, 144–145
Skin protection
in vitro methods, 197–198, 201
in vivo methods, 198–201
Skin protective materials, evaluation of, 477
Skin radiance
clinical scoring, 412
defined, 407
methods for measuring, 407–412
[Skin radiance
methods for measuring]
assessment of skin ability to reflect light,
411–412
assessment of skin microcirculation, 407–408
assessment of skin relief, 409–410
colorimeters, 408–409
photography, 409
quantification of, 403–404
Skin reactivity, to HN, 27
Skin relief
according to sites, 17
assessment of, 409–410
in ethnic races, 11
influence of sex, 14
related to age, 15–16
Skin scrub agents, 369
Skin structure
GAG, 253
lipids, 253–258
overview, 243
proteins
collagen, 244, 245–247
elastin, 244–250
protein structure, 250–252
techniques, 243
water, 253
Skin surface
analysis, with SIAscope, 278–279
contact thermography, cellulite evaluation,
607
hydration, 143–144
patterns, 141
proteins and surfactants, 457
topography measurement, 608
Skin surface biopsies (SSB), 199
Skin surface water loss (SSWL), 138–139
Skin tape application methods
for assessing inflammatory skin reactions
mRNA fragments, 487
structural proteins, 486
Skin thickness measurement, 64
Skin types, water distribution in the skin for
different, 160–161. See also Raman
microspectroscopy
Skin wettability, 427–432. See also Skin hydration
contact angle measurement and, 427–428
critical surface tension and, 428–429
data analyses, 429–431
hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance and, 429
Skin-whitening agents, 587–593
ascorbic acid, 590
glutathione, 590
hydroquinone, 587–589
kojic acid, 589–590
pigmentation disorders’ treatment, 597–601
SLEB. See Subepidermal low echogenic band
(SLEB)
SLES. See Sodium lauryl ether sulfate (SLES)
SLN. See Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN)
SLS. See Sodium lauryl sulfate; Sodium lauryl
sulfate (SLS)
Smoking, effects on aging, 293
Index
865

=== Page 883 ===
Soap
for baby, 618
chamber test, 476
and friction coefficient of skin, 423
SOC. See Skin organ culture
SOD. See Copper-zinc superoxide dismutase
Sodium, 547–548
Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3), 644
Sodium chloracetate, 770
Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 511
Sodium hydroxide, 745
Sodium lauryl ether sulfate (SLES), 772
Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), 98, 197, 455, 499,
542, 771
induced irritation in human face, 499–502
irritation to, 477
occlusion test, skin sensitivity, 85
Sodium metabisulfite, 557
Soft focus effects, 128–129
Software for measurement of skin hydration,
155–156
Solar lentigos, 598
Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN), 789
Sonophoresis, 183
Sorbitan, 783–784
Sorbitol, 115
esters, 783–784
Sorption-desorption test, 137
Spectrometer, 16
Spectrophotometric intracutaneous analysis
(SIAscopy)
chromophore mapping, 278
contact SIAscopy, 277–278
defined, 275
hydration level assessment, 279
mathematical optical model construction,
275–276
noncontact SIAscopy, 279–280
surface analysis, 278–279
Spectroscopy
cellulite evaluation, 608
hair
ESR, 717
fluorescence, 713
infrared (IR), 713–714
integrating sphere spectrophotometry, 715–716
NIR, 715
Raman, 713–714
X-ray, 716
SPF. See Sun protection factor
Spin probes, in EPR, 207–210
EPR line shapes due to motion of, 209
nitroxide probes, 207–208
single-chain aliphatic, 208–209
SPM. See Scanning probe microscopy (SPM), hair
Sport
revulsive products used in, 656–658
SPRR3, 539
SPSS. See Self-perceived sensitive skin (SPSS)
SSB. See Skin surface biopsies
SSR. See Single solarsimulated radiation
Standard deviation (SD), 501
Standard erythemal dose (SED), 328
Standard operating procedures (SOPs), 820
Staphylococcus aureus, 647
State cosmetic regulations in US, 841
Stearalkonium chloride, 692
Stearamidopropyl dimethylamine, 694
Stearyl alcohol, 634
Sticks
antiperspirants. See Sticks, antiperspirants
deodorants, 647
Sticks, antiperspirants
emulsions
clear O/W, 636
W/O, 636
gel
clear anhydrous, 635
white anhydrous, 635
soft
clear water-in-silicone emulsion gels, 636
white/anhydrous creams, 636
suspension, 634
Stingers, 60
Stinging test
skin sensitivity, 501
Stinging type, sensitive skin, 34–35
Strain curves, vs. time curves, 821–822
Stratum corneum, 91–96, 340
lamellar lipid
arrangement, 96
water permeability, 96
lipids, 94
organization, 94–96
structural models, 94–96
natural moisturizing factor (NMF), 92–94
Stratum corneum (SC), 67, 68, 151, 176, 185, 346,
359, 539, 740
EPR probes for, 207–213
role in ICD, 444
skin hydration, 29, 31–32
skin sensitivity and, 33, 35
thickness, and measurement of, 158–159
thickness contribution to buffering capacity of
skin, 216–217
water content in, 440
Stratum granulosum (SG), 176, 539, 740
Stratum spinosum, 539
Streakiness, of lipstick, 399
Stress/strain curves, hair, 706–707
Stringing test, skin sensitivity, 85
Strivectin-SD1, 297
Strontium
salts, anti-itch testing, 575
and selenium, 548, 551
Subepidermal low echogenic band (SLEB), 250, 294
Suberythematous irritation, 439, 448
Subjective irritation, from UV filters, 319
Submicron emulsion (SME). See Nanoemulsions
Substantivity, of silicones, 373–374
Sucrose fatty acid ester, 645
Sulfates
alkyl ether sulfates (AES), 771–772
alkyl glyceride sulfates, 772
alkyl sulfates, 771
amide ether sulfates, 772
866
Index

=== Page 884 ===
Sulfo fatty acid esters, 774
Sulfonates
alkyl-aryl sulfonates, 773
alkyl sulfonates, 772–773
fatty acid isethionates, 774
sulfo fatty acid esters, 774
sulfosuccinates, 773
taurides, 774
Sulfosuccinates, 773
Sunblocks, 317–318
Sunburn, 293
Sunburn cells (SBC), 350
Sun care products, silicones for, 373–376
Sun protection
infrared radiation, 324–325
against IRR, 327
nutritional, 328
ultraviolet radiation, 323–324
against UVR, 326–327
water/sweat resistance, 327
Sun protection factor (SPF), 311, 326
Sunscreens, 324
baby care, 619
and contact allergic reactions, 558
legislation concerning, 325
nomenclature, 313–315
water/sweat resistance, 327
Surface-active agents. See Surfactants
Surface area/body weight ratio
baby vs. adult skin, 615
Surface free energy (SFE), of skin, 429
data analysis, 430–431
Surface proteins, surfactant interaction with, 459–460
Surface-smoothing agents, 295
Surfactant-containing products, 456
anti-irritants for. See Anti-irritation
Surfactants, 121, 122, 145, 368–369
amphoteric, 369
anionic, 369
comedogenic scores of, 584
effects, EPR, 213
and elastic vesicles, 800
interaction with
with lipids or membranes, 461
with living cells in vitro, 461
with proteins in vitro or in vivo, 460
with skin in vivo, 461–462
ionic, 769–779
mixed micelles of, 459
mixtures, skin irritation in, 460
non-hydrocarbon speciality, 785
non-ionic, 779–785
skin care, 98
skin irritation by, 455
in standard animal irritation assays, 537–538.
See also Non-surfactant compounds
Suspension sticks, 634
Sweat
contribution to buffering capacity of skin, 216
glands
apocrine, 631
eccrine, 631
resistance, 327
Synchrotron X-ray microdiffraction, 738
Syndets
baby, 618
Synergistic combinations of penetration enhancers
(SCOPE), 193
Synthetic detergents. See Syndets
Synthetic menthol, 664
Synthetic quaternized polymers, 367–368
Takasago process, 662
Tanning agents, 342–343
Tape stripping, 63, 340
Taurides, 774
TDD. See Transdermal drug delivery (TDD)
TEALS. See Triethanolamine lauryl sulfate (TEALS)
Technical information file (TIF) prerequisite,
826–827
T4 endonuclease V (T4N5), 335
Tensile properties, of hair
post-yield region, 709
stress/strain curves, 706–707
tensile testers, 709–710
yield region, 708
Tensile testers, hair, 709–710
Testosterone, 541, 543
Tetra alkyl ammonium salts, 776–777
Tetraphthalydine dicamphor sulfonic acid, 317
Tewameter1, 499
TEWL. See Transepidermal water loss (TEWL)
(qTEWL). See TEWL after SLS exposure (qTEWL)
TEWL after SLS exposure (qTEWL), 501
Texture analysis, hair, 725–726
Thermal degradation, 331
Thermal sensory testing, 84–85
Thermoreception, 670–672
Thickeners, 340
Thickness, conditioners ingredients, 698–699
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC), 809
Thinners, 750
Thiol antioxidants, 304–305
Thixotropic agents, 750
Three-dimensional (3D) skin models, 345
Tight junctions, 96
Tight skin vs. wrinkled skin, 36–37
Time curves vs. strain curves, 821–822
Tincture, 133
Titanium dioxide (TiO2), 317, 318
Titanium metal chelates, 633
TLC. See Thin-layer chromatography (TLC)
TMP. See Trimethylpsoralen (TMP)
T4N5. See T4 endonuclease V
a-Tocopherol, 302, 303, 679
a-Tocopherol acetate (a-TAc), 349
d-Tocopherol glucoside (d-TG), 349
Tocopherols, 301–303, 679
Tocotrienols, 307
Toluene, 749
Toluene sulfonamide/formaldehyde resin
(TSFR), 749
Topical dermato-cosmetic products, for
cellulite, 609
Torsion measurements, hair, 712–713
Index
867

=== Page 885 ===
Tosylamide/formaldehyde resin, 557–558
Toxicity, of UV filters, 318–319
Toxic reactions, nail. See Allergic reactions, nail
Transdermal drug delivery (TDD), 183
FDA-approved, 191–192
Transepidermal water loss (TEWL), 8, 32, 86–87,
143, 165, 199, 331, 474, 499, 542, 547, 616, 820
with age, 16
anatomical sites, 18
comparison between regions, 500
comparison between two age groups, 500
correlation with percutaneous absorption,
165–168
qualitative reasoning for, 170–171
correlation study, 500–501
effect of potassium on, 548
in ethnic races, 12, 41–43
increase in, 29
investigational study, 499–500
between sexes, 14–15
for skin sensitivity measurement, 64
Transfersomes, 799
Transient receptor potential (TRP), 655, 670
Trans-8-methyl-N-vanillyl-nonenamide. See
Capsaicin
Traumiterative ICD, 448
Triazones, 317
Tricetylmonium chloride, 693
Trichobacteriosis, ULEV method for examining,
288–289
Triclosan, 645
Triethanolamine lauryl sulfate (TEALS), 771
Triethylcitrate, esterase inhibitors, 645
Tri-Luma, 599–600
Trimethylpsoralen (TMP), 789
Trimethylsilylamodimethicones. See
Amodimethicones
TRP. See Transient receptor potential
TRPM8 receptor channel, 671
TSFR. See Toluene sulfonamide/formaldehyde
resin (TSFR)
Turbo-PUVA, 342
Tyrosinase activity, 544
ULEV. See UV-light enhanced visualization
(ULEV) method
Ultrasonic imaging of skin, cellulite evaluation,
607–608
Ultrasound measurements, of photoaging, 294
Ultraviolet radiation (UVR), 13, 316–317, 331
antioxidants, 324
defined, 323
free radicals, 324
free radical scavengers, 324
photostability, 324
protection against, 326–327
skin effects of, 323–324
sunscreens, 324
UV filters. See UV filters
wavelength ranges in, 323
Umbelliferae, 440
Unaided visual scores of sensory effects, 382–383
Uniaxial tension test, 822
United States (US)
cosmetic industry
impact of EU legislations on, 841–842
PCPC role, 839, 842
response to changing regulations, 842–843
federal laws, 839–841
definition of cosmetics, 839
for products containing AHA, 840
regulation of UV filters, 312–313
state laws, 841
Unites States Pharmacopeia (USP), 125
“Unripe” skin, 613
Urea, 115–116
Urinary radioactivity, 169
USP. See Unites States Pharmacopeia
UV filters, 296, 311–319, 324
adverse reactions (toxicity), 318–319
definitions, 311
formulation, 318
history, 311–312
individual, 316
mechanism of action, 313
nomenclature, 313–315
physical blockers, 317–318
regulatory, 312–313
technologies, 627
UVA, 317
UVB, 316–317
UV irradiation, in vivo, 167
UV light, 678, 689
aging and, 292–293
UV-light enhanced visualization (ULEV) method,
283–289
comedogenesis, 286
dandruff assessments, 289
hair graying assessment, 288
sebum excretion assessment, 286–288
skin cancer’s risk assessment, 289
skin surface microrelief and scaliness evaluation,
285–286
subclinical melanoderma, 283–285
trichobacteriosis examination using, 288–289
whitening agents assessment, 285
UVR. See Ultraviolet radiation (UVR)
van der Waals, 693
Vellus hair follicles, in ethnic races, 50
Vernix caseosa, 97–98, 614
Vertical suction method, 821
Very sensitive skin, 60
Vesicles, for topical applications, 791–792
Virgin hair surfaces, 689
Viscoelastic properties of skin, 821
using Cutometer1, 294
VisioScan camera, 283, 284
Vitamin C, 303–304
Vitamin derivatives, 130
Vitamin E, 301–303
oral supplementation, 591
Vitamins, 679–680
Volatile siloxanes, 372
868
Index

=== Page 886 ===
Voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels (VSCC), 176
Vulva, 505
Vulvar skin sensitivity, 68–70
Washing test, 86
irritant effects of detergent, 477
Water content. See Skin hydration
Water distribution, in skin, 160–161
Water-in-cyclomethicone emulsions, 125
Water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) emulsions,
124–125
Water-in-oil (W/O), 332
emulsions, 121, 124, 635–636
Water-in-silicone emulsions, 125
Water overexposure, skin hydration and, 99
Water resistance (WR), 326
Australian/New Zealand guideline, 327
the Colipa guideline, 327
FDA guideline, 327
Water-soluble constituents of epidermis, 216
Water-soluble ointment bases emulsions, 125
Water structure, and skin, 253, 256
Wavelength ranges
infrared radiation, 323
ultraviolet radiation, 323
Waving evaluation, hair, 730–731
Wettability measurement, hair, 722–723
White/anhydrous creams, 636
White anhydrous gel sticks, 635
Whitening products, skin care
assessment using ULEV method, 285
Wilkinson Sword Ltd., cooling agents of, 666–667
Wing cells, 537
Witch hazel. See Hamamelis
W/O. See Water-in-oil
W/O emulsions. See Water-in-oil, emulsions
World Health Organization (WHO), 361
W/O/W emulsions. See Water-in-oil-in-water
emulsions
WR. See Water resistance
Wrinkled skin vs. tight skin, 36–37
Wrinkles, 240
facial, 293–294
%WRR. See Percentage water resistance retention
W/Si (water-in-silicone) emulsion roll-on, 637
Xanthines, anticellulite products, 609
Xenobiotic metabolism, 543, 544
Xeroderma pigmentosa skin model, 348
Xerosis. See Dry skin
X-linked recessive ichthyosis (XRI), 167
X-ray spectroscopy, hair, 716
XRI. See X-linked recessive ichthyosis (XRI)
Young’s modulus, 822
ZAG. See Aluminum zirconium glycine
Zinc
gel formulation, 200–201
glycinate, esterase inhibitors, 645
ricinoleate, odor-quenching deodorants, 644
Zinc oxide (ZnO), 317, 318
Index
869

