=== Page 1 ===
Int J Cosmet Sci. 2023;45(Suppl. 2):1–61. 
﻿ 
   |  1
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/ics
DOI: 10.1111/ics.12921 
A B S T R A C T 
Inspired by Nature
ADVANCES IN THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF INGREDIENTS WITH BOTH HIGH 
PERFORMANCE AND SUSTAINABILITY FOR 
CLEAN BEAUTY COSMETICS
J. w. Yoo1,*; J. Ko1; J. Choi1; H. Kim1; J. Nam; A. Ö. ST2; 
W.-­S. Park1
1Amorepacific Research and Innovation Center, Yongin, 
Gyeonggi-­do 17074, Republic of Korea; 2Amorepacific 
Europe, 49/53 avenue des champs Elysées, 75008 Paris
OBJECTIVE: Recently, as consumer's interest in the 
clean beauty cosmetics has remarkably increased, most 
cosmetic companies are trying to define their own clean 
beauty and differentiate it from others. In this presenta-
tion, we will look into meaningful attempts for clean 
beauty focusing on the development of sustainable ingre-
dients and hope to provide insights on approaches to de-
velop sustainable ingredients in the cosmetics.
METHODS: Various attempts to develop sustainable 
ingredients in major cosmetic companies were searched 
by using related keywords in the search engine such as 
Google and Scifnder. Among the search results and our 
own cases, appropriate examples that could provide in-
sights were selected.
RESULTS: More sustainable sourcing of renewable 
raw materials is an important first step to develop 
sustainable ingredients. Microalgae and recycled food 
waste are attracting attention as renewable resources. The 
consumers are beginning to recognize the importance of 
the sustainable processing method such as green chemistry 
and green science [1]. The modification to desired physical 
properties such as sensory feeling and skin permeability of 
biopolymers while maintaining its natural characteristics 
as much as possible is also an important research topic. 
Although many different sustainable ingredients with less 
impact on the environment and human health have been 
developed, their performance and price are still hurdles 
preventing their widespread use. Recently, research to 
improve the competitiveness of sustainable ingredients 
in terms of performance and price have been actively 
conducted. For example, high purity of flavonoids which 
inhibit 3-­phosphoinositide-­dependent kinase (PDK1), a 
key factor in the reverse aging process, was prepared from 
the upcycled seed cake of Camellia japonica as an anti-­
aging agent [2].
CONCLUSION: The sustainable ingredients should 
be designed considering not only sustainability but also 
performance and cost for wider use. In order to realize 
this, close collaboration between industry, academia, and 
research institutes will be required.
KEY WORDS: Sustainable cosmetic ingredients, Clean 
beauty, Upcycling, Green chemistry, Biomaterials
1. Li C., Trost B. M. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 2008, 
105:13197–­13202.
2. Kim J., Kim H., Choi D., Choi J., Cho S. Y., Kim S., Baek 
H., Yoon K. D., Son S. W., Son E. D., Hong Y., Ko J., Cho 
S., and Park W., Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy 2022, 
156: 113864.
PROBING GREEK FLORA TOWARDS THE 
DISCOVERY OF NOVEL COSMETIC ENTITIES 
EMPLOYING CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL 
PROFILING APPROACHES
M. Ηalabalaki*
Division of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products 
Chemistry, Department of Pharmacy, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, 
Zografou, 15771, Athens, Greece
Plant preparations like herbal infusions have been used 
in medicine since ancient times, due to their known 
medicinal properties[1]. Nowadays, the use of these 
“natural ingredients” for cosmetic formulations is in 
growing development and demand, since an extensive 
number of natural compounds are being used in products 
for skin care treatments and protection, among others. 
Greece, with more than 6000 species of higher plants 
is an area of high conservation, with a ~ 22% of its flora 
being endemic [2]. Thus, Greek flora has become a target 
of study since several varieties of bioactive constituents 
can be discovered [3]. Furthermore, technology outbreak 
today, is offering valuable tools and methods with speed, 
sensitivity, specificity, and efficiency, able to unfold the 
© 2023 The Authors. © 2023 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Société Française de Cosmétologie
*Refers to the corresponding author.

=== Page 2 ===
2  |     
​ABS​TRACT
active compounds of complex natural extracts in a more 
comprehensive and rational manner. In this scope the 
objective of the current research project is the meaningful 
correlation of the composition and biological properties 
of 52 Greek plants (endemic, edible, medicinal), aiming 
to their potential use in cosmetics and cosmeceuticals. 
Plant materials were collected and extracted using both 
Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE-­CO2) and Accelerated 
Solvent Extraction (ASE). The metabolite profiling of 
the obtained extracts was performed using an array of 
complementary methods (HPLC-­DAD, HPTLC, LC-­
HRMS/MS and NMR). In parallel the same extracts 
were evaluated towards their cytotoxicity, antioxidant 
and UV-­protective activity, possible tyrosinase, elastase 
and collagenase inhibitory activity as well as anti-­aging 
properties. Furthermore, the photoprotective properties 
in cellular models were assessed together with anti-­
melanogenesis profile in zebrafish models. Certain plant 
species and extracts have been distinguished so far and 
specific chemical classes and/or secondary metabolites 
have been prioritized as promising candidates due to their 
biological properties profile. As an indicative example, 
the chemistry and biology of Chios Mastic Gum (Pistacia 
lentiscus var Chia resin) will be also presented.
KEY WORDS: cosmetics, metabolite profiling, Greek 
flora, UV-­protective activity, anti-­aging properties, Chios 
Mastic Gum.
1. Oliveira AS, Rolo J, Gaspar C, et al. Thymus masti-
china (L.) L. and Cistus ladanifer L. for skin application: 
Chemical characterization and in vitro bioactivity assess-
ment. J Ethnopharmacol 2022; 115830. doi:10.1016/j.
jep.2022.115830
2. Trigas P, Kalpoutzakis E, Kalogiannis E, et al. 
Noteworthy new floristic records from Greece. Bot Serb 
2021; 45: 321–­331. doi:10.2298/BOTSERB2102321T
3. Sklirou AD, Angelopoulou MT, Argyropoulou A, et al. 
Phytochemical study and in vitro screening focusing on 
the anti-­aging features of various plants of the greek flora. 
Antioxidants 2021; 10. doi:10.3390/antiox10081206
4. Pachi VK, Mikropoulou EV, Gkiouvetidis P, Siafakas 
K, Argyropoulou A, Angelis A, Mitakou S, Halabalaki 
M. Traditional uses, Phytochemistry and pharmacol-
ogy of Chios mastic gum (Pistacia lentiscus var. Chia, 
Anacardiaceae): A review. J Ethnopharmacology, 2020; 
254, 112485. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2019.112485
BIO-­INSPIRED MICROGELS FOR COSMETICS … 
AND WHAT ELSE?
G. Aguirre1,2; P. Marcasuzaa1,2; L. Billon1,2,*
1Universite de Pau et pays Adour, IPREM UMR 5254, Pau, 
France; 2Bio-­Inpired materials group: Functionalities & 
Self-­Assembly, UPPA, Pau, France
OBJECTIVE: Nowadays, biocompatibility, biodegra-
dability and sustainability over synthetic polymers have 
gained a significant importance as environmentally-­
friendly process and materials for many applications 
standing out personal care and cosmetic ones. Among 
different delivery systems for skincare applications, mi-
crogels deserve a special mention thanks to their incom-
parable chemical and physical versatility. Microgels as 
stimuli-­responsive cross-­linked soft colloidal particles 
water-­borne dispersion offer porous structures, i.e. micro-­
sponges, to encapsulate/release in water media a broad 
spectrum of different active molecules in a tunable fash-
ion. The present work describes the design of evolutive 
generations of smart microgels and their self-­assembly for 
skincare applications.
METHODS: In this scenario, natural polysaccharides, as 
versatile class of biopolymers, have attracted great atten-
tion in the design of biomaterials. Among various poly-
saccharides, chitosan has gain special attention owing to 
its unique and versatile biological properties. In addition, 
its polyelectrolyte nature makes it key candidate to design 
biodegradable soft microgels with film formation ability 
from water-­borne dispersions.
RESULTS: Herein, taking into account the above infor-
mation biodegradable multi-­responsive oligo(ethylene 
glycol)-­based microgels have been synthesized using 
different chitosan-­methacrylates (Chi-­MA) as cross-­
linkers, with film-­forming property in an easy handling 
process. Colloidal characteristics in terms of thermo/pH-­
responsiveness have been analysed. To assess the biodeg-
radability, the enzymatic degradation of the system has 
been studied under the presence of lysozyme. In addition, 
their spontaneous cohesive film formation ability has 
been confirmed by just simple water evaporation under 
skin condition of temperature. Regarding the properties of 
the self-­assembled films, their mechanical, adhesive and 
mechano-­electrical properties, associated to the encapsu-
lation ability of different types of active molecules make 
them a sustainable vectorisation/protection for skincare 
applications.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 3 ===
|  3
ABSTR​ACT
CONCLUSION: This presentation describes the evolu-
tive thinking and design of five generations of soft micro-
gels from synthetic to sustainable one, conserving their 
initial encapsulation/release, film-­forming, adhesive and 
mechano-­electrical properties for skin care applications, 
and finally moving beyond the horizon of the academic 
research [1] to the BIOMIM‘Gel start-­up creation [2].
KEY WORDS: microgel, water-­borne dispersion, bio-
degradability/sustainability, encapsulation/release, self-­
assembled microgel film, skin applications.
REFERENCES
1. a) Macro. Rapid. Comm. 2015, 36, 79−83 b) Polym 
Chem. 2016, 7, 350-­363 c) Materials & Design 2018, 147, 
19–­27 d) Polym. Chem. 2018, 9, 757-­768 e) Polym. Chem. 
2018, 11, 1155-­1159 f) Colloids & Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 
2019, 175, 445-­453 g) Adv. Colloid & Interf. Sci. 2021, 287, 
102333 h) J. Colloid & Interf. Sci., 2021, 581, 806-­815 i) 
Pharmaceutics, 2021, 13, 1422 j) Colloids and Surfaces A: 
Phys. & Eng. Aspects, 2021, 613, 126082.
2. a) WO2016110615, 2016 b) WO2019077404, 2019 c) 
FR3104418, 2019 d) FR3104419, 2019 e).
FR3103379, 2019 f) WO2020243607, 2020 g) EP22306638, 
2022 h) WO2022200534, 2022.
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN MICROORGANISMS 
AND PLANTS: BIOINSPIRATIONS FOR THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF ACTIVE INGREDIENTS
C. Malhaire Delefosse*, M. Villey, F. Yvergnaux
BioEurope –­ SOLABIA group, route d‘Oulins, 28260 Anet, 
France
Bio-­inspired development approaches, which are more 
and more widespread today, allow the transfer and appli-
cation of knowledge resulting from the observation and 
understanding of biological models, for the purpose of in-
novation in a variety of fields.
Biotechnologies, through knowledge of these phenomena 
observed in nature, are a powerful way of producing natu-
rally rare molecules in order to develop new bio-­inspired 
active ingredients, in particular for cosmetic applications.
Different cases of interactions between microorganisms 
and plants were investigated as new sources of bioinspi-
ration. The first example is drawn from the infection of 
grapes with the fungus Botrytis cinerea. During a defence 
mechanism, the enzymatic system of the fungus partici-
pates in producing a resveratrol dimer named δ-­viniferin 
[1], particularly interesting for cosmetic applications. This 
molecule has very powerful anti-­aging properties, both 
preventive and curative. It also has significant antibacte-
rial activity, particularly against Gram-­positive bacteria 
[2]. We mimed this natural phenomenon of bioconver-
sion by developing a two steps-­biotechnological process 
to produce polyphenol dimers. This biomimetic approach 
has enabled us to reach the industrial production of res-
veratrol dimer; and it is also a way of accessing other 
polyphenol dimers using specific substrates. For example, 
quercetin is an interesting molecule for cosmetic applica-
tions, it is found in the skin of onions as a protective mole-
cule against UV aggression. Thanks to our process we can 
produce a quercetin dimer which is a powerful compound 
to fight aging in the skin by stimulating the natural anti-
oxidant defences and by increasing dermal resistance to 
oxidative stress.
In nature, we can find other kind of interactions between 
microorganism and plant, such as symbiosis. An example 
of symbiosis can be found in the interaction between a 
fungus, Pseudozyma flocculosa, and the vine or the clover. 
By antibiosis, the microorganism is able to protect its eco-
logical niche while preserving the plant from some phy-
topathogenic infections [3]. Thus, the produced molecule, 
a glycolipid named flocculosin, has very interesting anti-
microbial properties. Potentially, this molecule could also 
have properties for cosmetic applications, particularly on 
skin having an imbalance of the microbiota.
The use of biotechnology for the production of new bio-­
inspired molecules is thus a way of accessing powerful ac-
tive ingredients for skin care and hair care.
1. Pezet R., Perret C., Jean-­Denis JB., Tabacchi R., Gindro 
K., Viret O., Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
2003, vol. 51, no. 18.
2. Mattio LM., Dallavalle S., Musso L., Filardi R., Franzetti 
L., Pellegrino L., D‘Incecco P., Mora D., Pinto A., Arioli S., 
Scientific reports, 2019, vol.9, no. 19525.
3. Cheng Y., McNally DJ., Labbé C., Voyer N., Belzile F., 
Bélanger RR., Applied and environmental microbiology, 
2003 vol. 69, no.5.
COSMETIC POTENTIAL OF A RECOMBINANT 
PROTEIN
I. Hansenne-­Cervantes*; J. O‘Neill
Modern Meadow, Inc., 111 Ideation Way, suite 100, Nutley, 
NJ 07110, USA
OBJECTIVE: Collagen has been widely used as a major 
component for dermatology and cosmetic formulations 
because of its significant benefits as a natural ingredient 
and moisturizer. Animal-­derived collagen suffers draw-
backs such as risks of infectious disease and viral trans-
missions, allergic reaction, negative public perception/
regulatory bans and unpleasant smell/colour; however, it 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 4 ===
4  |     
​ABS​TRACT
is relatively abundant and affordable. Thus, the customers 
are constantly looking for innovative, more sustainable, 
and truly efficacious products.
METHODS: Here we report the production of a 50 kDa 
protein produced in yeast that is 100% identical to the 
N-­terminus of the human type III collagen and the in-
dustrialization of both the fermentation and purifica-
tion processes to produce a final recombinant protein. In 
this study, we report the evaluation of the efficacy of this 
human collagen III inspired recombinant 50 kDa protein 
in vitro on dermal fibroblasts and ex vivo to understand 
its mode of action. Safety profile and clinical studies have 
been performed to evaluate its tolerance and efficacy.
RESULTS: The final protein was shown to be safe for 
general applications to human skin and compatible with 
common formulation. This recombinant collagen type III 
protein was shown to stimulate collagen type III and we 
report the successful study on human skin explant show-
ing the upregulation of the gene expression in the Extra 
Cellular Matrix and in the Dermal Epidermal Junction. 
Clinical studies have shown a benefit in anti-­aging with 
increase of the collagen content, barrier function and skin 
density. Clinical experts have scored an improvement 
of different parameters including firmness, lines and 
wrinkles.
CONCLUSION: The unique combination biostimulation 
and clinical studies make this novel recombinant Type III 
collagen a good candidate for broad application usage in 
dermatology and in the cosmetics industry.
KEY WORDS: Collagen, Pichia, recombinant, fermenta-
tion, cosmetics, bioactive
ATOPHYLLINE®, A BIO-­INSPIRED ATOPIC SKIN 
CARE TARGETING CHEMOKINES
Q. T. Do; P. Bernard*
Greenpharma SAS, 45100 Orléans, France
OBJECTIVE: We report a new strategy to manage atopic 
skin bio-­inspired by how ticks are elusive from our im-
mune system. This innovative approach is based on the 
modulation of the chemokines with “neutraligands” and 
not their receptors. Our goal is to find a atopic skin care 
with a long action and avoiding relapses.
METHODS: The chemokine CCL17 was identified as a 
crucial target for atopic manifestations and relapses. A 
virtual screening was performed with Ambinter.com da-
tabase on the 3D model of CCL17 to select potential active 
compounds. The selected products were validated in vitro 
in a protein binding assay, then the true hits were tested 
for their effect on T-­cell migration, CCL17 induced genes 
and the main components of the extracellular matrix. The 
most potent compound, Atophylline, was evaluated clini-
cally with SCORAD and POEM indexes and volunteer 
self-­evaluation of efficacy. The conditions are: 2 groups 
of 22 volunteers with mild-­to-­moderate atopic dermatitis 
treated with Atophylline vs Placebo; twice daily applica-
tion on skin during 28 days. Active product: Atophylline 
0.44% + Glycerin 4.56%. Placebo: Glycerin 4.56%.
RESULTS: Atophylline inhibits dose-­dependently the 
CCL17–­CCR4 interaction, the migration of T-­cells and the 
expression of atopic dermatitis contribution genes (MMP-­
2, IL-­18 and CCL5).
It stimulates the synthesis of collagen I, elastin and hyalu-
ronic acid for the extracellular matrix regeneration.
Clinically, the SCORAD and POEM indexes indicate that 
Atophylline significantly improves atopic skin symptoms 
and quality of life. It reduces the pruritus from D7 and the 
skin inflammation and improves the skin hydration and 
the skin barrier function.
Atophylline is highly approved by the users as assessed by 
the efficacy self-­evaluation questionnaire.
CONCLUSION: By mimicking the strategy of ticks to lure 
of immune system, we could identify a potent product to 
counter the excessive immune reactions in atopic skin. 
All the experimental and clinical results demonstrate that 
Atophylline represents an efficient atopic skin care, exert-
ing its effects on a new biological pathway.
KEY WORDS: Chemokine, bioinspiration, atopic skin, 
erythema, pruritus, barrier function, moisturizing
EVALUATION OF THE CONTRIBUTION OF 
METABOLOMIC METHODS TO THE SEARCH 
FOR NEW NATURAL INGREDIENTS FOR THE 
COSMETICS INDUSTRY
D. Da Silva1,*; P.-­E. Campos1; L. Fougère1; C. Colas1,2; 
E. Destandau1
1UMR7311, Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique, 
Université d‘Orléans, CNRS, Orléans, France; 2Centre de 
Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS-­Université d‘Orléans, 
UPR 4311, 45071 Orléans CEDEX 2, France
Venoms, microorganisms and plants are an incredible 
source of natural bioactive chemicals, many of which 
have unique physico-­chemical properties and have been 
employed for both therapeutic and cosmetic purposes. 
These natural ressources are being used more frequently 
in goods related to health and wellbeing as a result of cus-
tomer demand for natural products. The cosmetics indus-
try faces a major challenge in the rational management 
of the latter. This is why new resource strategies must be 
considered in order to limit the environmental impact and 
regulatory constraints while guaranteeing traceability for 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 5 ===
|  5
ABSTR​ACT
the cosmetics sector and the consumer. To accomplish 
this, the use of common local resources (invasive or non-­
invasive to ecosystems) or soilless culture as well as the 
use of co-­products from other industries would contribute 
to this alternative.
In parallel, different processes are required to convert the 
plant into a cosmetic ingredient, and the optimization of 
these processes can be achieved by regulating the phy-
tochemical content and the biological activity. Herein, 
we will present various examples of chemical studies of 
different natural resources (invasive alien species and 
cultivated plants) demonstrating the contribution of me-
tabolomic approaches (P, PLS-­DA) by high-­resolution 
mass spectrometry (MS) to the identification of distin-
guishing structures (metabolomic features), as well as 
the use of molecular networks to help characterize these 
molecules through dereplication (MS/MS or NMR). These 
extracts or fractions were screened on cosmetic enzymes 
(tyrosinase, elastase, collagenase, and xanthine oxidase) 
by in-­tubo approaches but also by enzymautography 
screenings for a targeted identification of potential major 
inhibitors. Several inhibitors could be linked as markers, 
for example two peptides for Asian hornet Vespa venom 
[1] and four flavonoids for Polygonum cuspidatum [2].
Implementing tools allow the identification of structure–­
activity relationships (of these molecules) via OMICS 
approaches combined with enzymatic screening is thus 
crucial in order to aid in the development of these new 
cosmetic products.
KEY WORDS: bioactive molecules, cosmetic ingredi-
ent, enzymatic screening. metabolomics, phytochemical 
study.
1. Le T. N., Da Silva D., Colas C., Darrouzet E., Baril P., 
Leseurre L., Maunit B., Toxicon, 2020, 176: 1–­9.
2. Quinty V., Colas C., Nasreddine R., Nehmé R., Piot C., 
Draye M., Destandau D., Da Silva D., Chatel G., Plants, 
2023;12: 83.
METHODOLOGY AND PRELIMINARY STEPS 
TO DEVELOP AN INNOVATIVE BIOINSPIRED 
COSMETIC ACTIVE INGREDIENT
M. Vieytez1,2,*; X. Fernandez1; V. Nardello-­Rataj2; 
A. Robert-­Hazotte3
1Institut de Chimie de Nice, Université Côte d‘Azur, 
France; 2Unité de catalyse et Chimie du Solide, Centrale 
Lille Institut, France; 3Shiseido Group, Europe Innovation 
Center, 4Avenue du Général de Gaulle, 45140 Ormes, 
France
The last few years have seen a strong development of nat-
ural cosmetics [1]. These products are positively perceived 
by consumers, rightly or wrongly, because they are associ-
ated with an impression of safety, efficiency, well-­being 
and being more respectful of health and the environment 
[2]. To respond to the growing consumer trend towards 
naturalness, the development of new innovative natural 
ingredients is at the heart of the cosmetics sector‘s con-
cerns. This process must be anchored in the principles 
of sustainable development and must also respect the 
regulatory framework, mandatory or simply proposed, to 
preserve the natural resources of the planet and the agree-
ment between countries for the protection of natural raw 
materials. They also must be scientifically innovative, 
whether that be a greener process, an pioneering raw ma-
terial or an innovative biological property. In the quest for 
innovation, it is becoming increasingly important to draw 
inspiration from nature to imagine biomimetic solutions 
to new challenges in natural product development.
The purpose of this research is to set up a methodology 
that allows cosmetic companies to develop cosmetic ac-
tive ingredients that are natural and innovative. More 
specifically, this research targets active ingredients bioin-
spired by plants. This methodology takes into account the 
different criteria to be considered when selecting plants 
for the development of new natural cosmetic actives. 
Starting from considering the different regulations and 
protection laws that exist in the world and which frame 
this type of development [3], this research also draws the 
path of the following steps of development once the plant 
of interest is selected. Steps such as the classic extraction 
methods of the active ingredient, characterization of the 
phytochemical profile (HPLC-­DAD/DEDL, GC–­MS/FID, 
NMR,…), evaluation of the efficacy of the extract (in vitro, 
ex vivo and in vivo biological assays), optimization of ex-
traction process and the transition to greener extraction 
conditions (ultrasound or microwave assisted extractions, 
pressurized fluid extraction,…) are discussed. Overall, the 
methodology presented in this research facilitates the de-
velopment of a new natural cosmetic active ingredient.
1. Cosmed. Rapport Cosmed -­ SVP: L‘intelligence 
Économique et Stratégique Des Entreprises de La Filière 
Cosmétique, 2nd Trimestre 2021.; 2021.
2. Guissart E, Barragan-­Montero V. Matières Premières 
Cosmétiques. Volume 1: Actifs Naturels. Cosmetic Valley 
Editions.; 2020.
3. Ferreira M, Matos A, Couras A, Marto J, Ribeiro H. 
Overview of Cosmetic Regulatory Frameworks around 
the World. Cosmetics. 2022;9(4):72.
KEY WORDS: Methodology, active ingredient, bioinspi-
ration, innovation, phytochemistry.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 6 ===
6  |     
​ABS​TRACT
PLANT STEM CELL CULTURES AS A NEW 
TREATMENT FOR HAIR AND SCALP
Ò. Expósito1;T. Ruiz2; A. Guirado*
1Vytrus biotech S.A., 121 Sant Gaietà 08221 Barcelona, 
Spain; 2Vytrus biotech S.A., 121 Sant Gaietà 08221 
Barcelona, Spain
OBJECTIVE: This paper aims to server as a solid demon-
stration of the hair tensegrity importance, a concept based 
in the compensation and long-­distance effects of tensional 
and compressional forces suffered by the scalp-­hair due 
to complex interactions between the extracellular matrix, 
cells, hair fibre and intercellular spaces, for haircare. Also, 
to demonstrate how an Olea europaea var. silvestris plant 
stem cell culture (OEPC) protects and improves differ-
ent tensegrity-­related parameters on in vitro, ex vivo and 
clinical trials.
METHODS: In vitro tests evaluated the antioxidant, anti-­
glycation, and anti-­inflammatory effects of OEPC. Also, 
fibroblast proliferation and increase on collagen III gene 
expression was measured by qRT-­PCR. Ex vivo assays 
tested the protection against UVA-­induced carbonylation, 
dyed hair colour loss, the active delivery into the hair cor-
tex, the hair diameter increase, and shaft strengthening.
Trichologists evaluated different hair parameters, scalp 
redness and dandruff, deformability/stiffness, and hy-
dration, in clinical trials. For the first time, structural an-
choring proteoglycans (versican and collagen17A) were 
evaluated in vivo.
RESULTS: OEPC showed a potent in vitro antioxidant 
activity (>80%), a potent anti-­glycation activity (19–­
51%), and anti-­inflammatory/anti-­desquamation (−36% 
to −47%). Also, collagen expression was induced 6-­fold 
times in human dermal fibroblast and their prolifera-
tion increased between 21–­51%. In ex vivo assays, UVA-­
induced carbonylation was reduced in hair shaft (60%), 
cuticle (70%) and cortex (54%) with a single application. 
Dye colour loss (−37%) and colour variation (36%) also 
reduced, while demonstrating active delivery into the 
hair cortex. Additionally, improvements in hair diameter 
(14%) and fibres strength (38%) were observed.
Clinical trials with volunteers demonstrated an increase 
in all the hair parameters tested, a reduction of 68% on 
scalp redness compared with T = 0, a strong reduction on 
redness and transepidermal water loss. Further, versican 
and collagen 17A levels increased on volunteers with an 
average of 15–­16% and 34% respectively.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, the results demonstrated 
that OEPC is a novel and perfect treatment to maintain 
and boost scalp and hair health by an innovative tenseg-
rity promotion approach, displaying effects on cells, iso-
lated hair fibres, and volunteers‘ scalp and hair.
KEY WORDS: Hair, Scalp, Tensegrity, Plant Stem Cells.
REFERENCES
1. Tajran J, Gosman AA (2020) Anatomy, Head, and Neck, 
Scalp. Publisher: StatPearls Publishing. Book available on-
line. https://www.ncbi.nkm.nih.gov/books/​NBK55​1565
2. Trüeb RM, Henry JP, Davis MG, Schwartz JR (2018) 
Scalp conditions impact hair growth and retention via oxi-
dative stress. Int J Trichology. 10: 262–­270
3. Ingber DE. Cellular tensegrity: defining new rules of 
biological design that govern the cytoskeleton. J Cell Sci 
1993; 104: 61113–­27.
4. Ingber DE, Dike L, Hansen L (1994) Cellular tensegrity: 
exploring how mechanical changes in the cytoskeleton 
regulate cell growth, migration, and tissue pattern during 
morphogenesis. Int Rev Cytol. 150: 173–­224.
5. Ingber DE (1997) Tensegrity: the architectural basis 
of cellular mechanotransduction. Annu Rev Physiol. 59: 
575–­99.
6. Silver FH, Siperko LM, Seehra GP (2003) Mechanobiology 
of force transduction in dermal tissue. Skin Res Technol. 
9: 3–­23.
7. Quatresooz P, Hermanns-­Leˆ T, Ciccarelli A (2005) 
Tensegrity and type I dermal dendrocytes in acromegaly. 
Eur J Clin Invest. 35: 133–­9.
8. Quatresooz P, Hermanns JF, Paquet P, Pie‘rard GE 
(2006) Mechanobiology and force transduction in scars 
developed in darker skin types. Skin Res Technol. 12: 
279–­82.
9. Quatresooz P, Uhoda E, Pie‘rard-­Franchimont C, 
Pie‘rard GE (2006) Cellulite histopathology and related 
mechanobiology. Int J Cosmet Sci. 28: 207–­10
10. Murphrey MB, Agaewal S, Zito PM (2022).Anatomy, 
Hair. Publisher: StatPearls Publishing. Book available on-
line. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/​NBK51​3312/
11. Kang YY, Kim JY, Song J, Mok H (2019) Enhanced 
intracellular uptake and stability of umbelliferone in com-
pound mixtures from Angelica gigas in vitro. Journal of 
pharmacological sciences. 140: 8–­13
12. Ozyürek M, Bektaşoğlu B, Güçlü K, Apak R (2008). 
Hydroxyl radical scavenging assay of phenolics and flavo-
noids with a modified cupric reducing antioxidant capacity 
(CUPRAC) method using catalase for hydrogen peroxide 
degradation. Analytica chimica acta. 616: 196–­206.
13. Lee C, Yim MB, Chock PB, Yim HS, Kang SO (1998). 
Oxidation–­reduction 
properties 
of 
methylglyoxal-­
modified protein in relation to free radical generation. 
The Journal of biological chemistry. 273:25272–­25278.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 7 ===
|  7
ABSTR​ACT
14. Wacker MJ, Godard MP (2005). Analysis of one-­step 
and two-­step real-­time RT-­PCR using SuperScript III. 
Journal of biomolecular techniques: JBT. 16:266–­271.
15. van Meerloo J, Kaspers GJ, Cloos J (2011) Cell sensitiv-
ity assays: the MTT assay. Methods in molecular biology 
(Clifton, N.J.). 731:237–­245.
16. Zhang G, McMullen RL, Kulcsar L (2016). Investigation 
of hair dye deposition, hair colour loss, and hair damage 
during multiple oxidative dyeing and shampooing cycles. 
Journal of cosmetic science. 67: 1–­11.
17. 2 AM, Del Rosso JQ (2014). Kallikrein 5-­mediated 
inflammation in rosacea: clinically relevant correlations 
with acute and chronic manifestations in rosacea and 
how individual treatments may provide therapeutic ben-
efit. The Journal of clinical and aesthetic dermatology. 7: 
20–­25.
18. Zani MB, Sant‘Ana AM, Tognato RC, Chagas JR, Puzer 
L (2022). Human Tissue Kallikreins-­Related Peptidases 
Are Targets for the Treatment of Skin Desquamation 
Diseases. Frontiers in medicine. 8: 777619.
19. Brattsand M, Stefansson K, Lundh C, Haasum Y, 
Egelrud T (2005). A proteolytic cascade of kallikreins in 
the stratum corneum. The Journal of investigative derma-
tology. 124:198–­203.
20. Powell AM, Sakuma-­Oyama Y, Oyama N, Black MM 
(2005) Collagen XVII/BP180: a collagenous transmem-
brane protein and component of the dermoepidermal an-
choring complex. Clinical and experimental dermatology. 
30:682–­687.
21. Tanimura S, Tadokoro Y, Inomata K, Binh NT, Nishie 
W, Yamazaki S, Nakauchi H, Tanaka Y, McMillan JR, 
Sawamura D, Yancey K, Shimizu H, Nishimura EK (2011) 
Hair follicle stem cells provide functional niche for mel-
anocyte stem cells. Cell stem cell. 8:177–­187.
22. Soma T, Tajima M, Kishimoto J (2005) Hair cycle-­
specific expression of versican in human hair follicles. 
Journal of dermatological science. 39:147–­154.
23. Watanabe M, Natsuga K, Nishie W, Kobayashi Y, 
Donati G, Suzuki S, Fujimura Y, Tsukiyama T, Ujie 
H, Shinkuma S, Nakamura H, Murajami M, Ozaki M, 
Nagayama M, Watt FM, Shimizu H (2017) Type XVII col-
lagen coordinates proliferation in the interfollicular epi-
dermis. eLife. 6:e26635.
24. Gonzalez-­Rico J, Quilez C, Lopez V, Muñoz-­Barrutia 
A, Jorcano JL, Velasco D (2019) The role of versican in 
the skin ECM and its interaction with hyaluronic acid. 
Biomecanica. 27:35–­49.
25. Wu YJ, La Pierre DP, Wu J, Yee AJ, Yang BB (2005) 
The interactions of versican with its binding partners. Cell 
research. 15:483–­494.
JASMINUM SAMBAC AS NATURAL 
ANTIOXIDANT BOOSTER AGAINST SKIN AGING
A. Tortora1,*; A. De Lucia1; A. Tito1; M. Angelillo2; 
V. Fogliano1,3
1Arterra bioscience spa via Benedetto Brin 69 Naples, 
Italy; 2Vitalab srl via Benedetto Brin 69 Naples, Italy; 
3Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands
OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study is to discover a new 
natural ingredient to prevent glycation negative effect on 
skin. Environmental factors such as cigarette smoke, high 
levels of dietary carbohydrates and intrinsic aging factors 
lead to development of advanced glycation end products 
(AGE) that can affect the elasticity of extracellular ma-
trix proteins and also induce oxidative and inflammatory 
reactions [1, 2]. Among our proprietary library of cell 
cultures, we selected Jasminum sambac for its potential 
anti-­oxidant and anti-­inflammatory metabolites.
METHODS: A hydroethanolic extract from Jasminum 
sambac cell culture (JasHEx) was obtained and chemi-
cally characterized by UPLC-­MS/MS according to [3]. 
Biological activities were analysed in human keratinocytes 
(HaCaT), human dermal fibroblasts (HDF), macrophages 
(Raw264.7) and ex vivo explants. On cell cultures, gene 
expression was monitored by semiquantitative RT-­PCR, 
ProColI and AGE products were revealed by ELISA, NRF2 
pathway activation was demonstrated by reporter assay 
and antioxidant and anti-­inflammatory activities were re-
vealed by fluorescence techniques. In ex vivo explants im-
munofluorescence method was used to detect fibrillin 1.
RESULTS: JasHEX was mainly composed of phenolic 
acid derivatives, lignans and triterpenes, well known for 
their antioxidant properties [4]. When tested on H2O2 
stressed keratinocytes JasHEx was able to reduce ROS 
production and used to pre-­treat glyoxal stressed fibro-
blasts prevent the development of AGE. This result was 
confirmed by ex vivo test in which JasHEx restored the 
fibrillin 1 content altered by glyoxal treatment. JasHEx 
through upregulation of Nrf2 pathway stimulated the ex-
pression of antioxidant genes and decreased Nitric Oxide 
release by LPS-­stimulated macrophages. In addition to 
this, JasHEx also showed an extracellular matrix protein 
booster effect increasing the production of collagen type I, 
that is highly sensitive to glycation and whose levels are 
significantly reduced by oxidative stress.
CONCLUSION: In this study a hydroethanolic extract 
from Jasminum sambac cell culture was completely char-
acterized for its chemical and biological activities. JasHEx 
is as new natural antioxidant booster that can prevent the 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 8 ===
8  |     
​ABS​TRACT
accumulation of AGE in skin conferring more elasticity to 
skin and preventing the oxidative and anti-­inflammatory 
damages.
KEY WORDS: Jasminum sambac, skin aging, reactive 
oxygen species, glycation, Nrf2
REFERENCES
1. Perrone, A.; Giovino, A.; Benny, J.; Martinelli, F. 
Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs): Biochemistry, 
Signalling, Analytical Methods, and Epigenetic Effects. 
Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2020, 2020, 3818196.
2. Masaki, H. Role of Antioxidants in the Skin: Anti-­Aging 
Effects. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2010, 58, 85–­90.
3. Ceccacci, S.; De Lucia, A.; Tito, A.; Tortora, A.; Falanga, 
D.; Arciello, S.; Ausanio, G.; Di Cicco, C.; Monti, M.C.; 
Apone, F. An Oenothera Biennis Cell Cultures Extract 
Endowed with Skin Anti-­Aging Activity Improves Cell 
Mechanical Properties. Metabolites 2021, 11, 527.
4. Ceccacci, S., De Lucia A., Tortora, A., Colantuono, 
A., Carotenuto, G.,Tito, A., and Monti M.C., Jasminum 
sambac Cell Extract as Antioxidant Booster against Skin 
Aging: Antioxidants 2022, 11, 2409.
This work was supported by funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
(InnCoCells project, grant agreement no 101000373).
THE POWER OF NATURE, ANTI-­AGING EFFECT 
OF ACTINIDIA CHINENSIS
M. De Matos*; J. Despres; L. Cubizolles
Groupe Berkem, Marais Ouest 24680 Gardonne, France
Skin is constantly in relation with external environment, 
and this is partly responsible for aging. Skin visibly loses 
its elasticity and firmness. For its defence, this interface 
plays a real barrier role and provides protection against 
exposome. This protective effect is ensured by the most 
superficial layer of the skin, the epidermis. Skin has also 
the capacity to regenerate and thus to maintain its barrier 
integrity, to properly fulfil its functions. This helps to fight 
alterations and consequently to slow down aging.
Actinidia chinensis is a vigorous liana tree, which can 
adapt to many climates and resist negative temperatures. 
The power of this plant and a local sourcing led BERKEM 
to develop an active plant extract.
Proteomic study is an innovative technique enabling the 
quantification and characterization of modulated pro-
teins. The aim is to assess ex-­vivo, the effect of Kiwi leaves 
extract on the regulation of cutaneous proteins. Skin ex-
plants were treated with the extract or not (basal level). 
The presence of proteins of interest was then highlighted 
by an immunolabelling technique. Finally, a clinical 
study was conducted to evaluate the visible effect of the 
extract on the skin. Tightening effect was studied with the 
Dynaskin®/ Dermatop® system. Fringe projection tech-
niques allow to measure the volume, the maximum depth 
and the area of the deformation.
An improvement of the skin barrier function and the 
skin‘s regenerative capacity functions was discovered 
with respectively 13 and 9 proteins regulated. Periostin, a 
matricellular protein considered as a key mediator of skin 
repair, is significantly increased by 38%* in the presence 
of 0.3% of the extract compared to the basal level. These 
biological effects support an anti-­aging effect. Indeed, im-
mediately after application, cream with 2% of the extract 
induces a significative decrease of 19.4%# of the maximum 
depth, 15.4*% of the area of deformation and 25.1#% of vol-
ume of the deformation compared to placebo. Moreover, 
73% of volunteers reported that the extract-­containing 
cream provides a lifting effect.
In conclusion, the kiwi leaves extract draws its strength 
from Nature and is able to reinforce barrier function, im-
prove skin renewal and provide an immediate tightening 
effect.
KEY WORDS: Actinidia chinensis, kiwi leaves extract, 
barrier function, Periostin, skin repair, tightening effect.
MICROALGAE-­DERIVED EXTRACELLULAR 
VESISCLES: NEW SUSTAINABLE INGREDIENTS 
FOR “GREEN” COSMETICS
P. Gargano1; G. Adamo1; S. Picciotto1; D. P. Romancino1; 
A. Paterna2; E. Rao2; M. Salamone1; S. Raccosta2; 
M. Manno2; A. Bongiovanni1,*
1Cell-­Tech HUB at Institute for Research and Biomedical 
Innovation (IRIB) –­ National Research Council of Italy 
(CNR), Palermo, Italy; 2Cell-­Tech HUB at Institute of 
Biophysics (IBF), National Research Council of Italy 
(CNR), Palermo, Italy
OBJECTIVE: Cells naturally release membranous parti-
cles called extracellular vesicles (EVs) which are stable in 
various biological fluids and can pass through biological 
barriers. For these reasons, they have aroused interest in 
various fields (e.g., biomedicine, nutraceuticals and cos-
metics) [1]. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the 
possibility of using microalgal-­derived EVs (Algosomes) 
as new ingredients for cosmetic formulations [2]. 
Microalgae extracts are already being used in cosmetics 
thanks to their beneficial properties [3,4,5]. Despite the 
growing demand for natural and ecofriendly cosmetics, 
microalgae extracts are currently obtained through chem-
ical extraction methods and do not satisfy these criteria. 
Conversely, Algosomes come from a natural, sustainable, 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 9 ===
|  9
ABSTR​ACT
and renewable source [6] and are isolated without the use 
of chemical procedures. In addition, EVs mirror the con-
tent of the producer cells, so Algosomes are likely to have 
beneficial properties as those of microalgae. In this study, 
we evaluate the biocompatibility and bioactivity of these 
EVs in one of the most used cellular model for cosmetics 
studies: Normal Human Dermal Fibroblasts (NHDF) cell 
line.
METHODS: First, the isolation of Algosomes derived 
from Tetraselmis chuii culture was carried out using tan-
gential flow filtration. Algosome biocompatibility was 
evaluated by cytotoxicity and genotoxicity assays. Next, 
we assessed their uptake ability in vitro using labelled 
Algosomes. Subsequently, we evaluated the antioxidant 
role of Algosomes through a reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
detection assay. Lastly, a scratch assay was performed to 
assess Algosomes‘ possible role in wound healing [8].
RESULTS: Our results confirm the biocompatibility of 
Algosomes for NHDF cell line and their ability to bypass 
the cellular membrane. The results showed Algosomes 
have a very potent antioxidant capacity, likely due to their 
enriched antioxidant cargo. Moreover, Algosomes posi-
tively influence cell migration.
CONCLUSION: Based on our results, we propose to ex-
ploit Algosomes as new, innovative and active ingredients 
for the formulation of green and eco-­friendly cosmetics.
KEY WORDS: Algosomes, cosmetic, extracellular vesci-
cles, microalgae, Tetraselmis chuii, antioxidant.
REFERENCES
1. D.E. Murphy, et al., Exp Mol Med 51 (2019) 1–­12.
2. Picciotto S, et al., Biomater Sci (2021) 2917–­2930.
3. Banskota, H. A., et al., Natural product research. (2012) 
1084–­1090.
4. Cuellar-­Bermudez et al., Microbial Biotechnology (2015) 
190–­209.
5. Coulumbier et al., Mar Drugs. (2021) 549.
6. Adamo G et al.,. J. Extracellular Vesicles (2021) 
10:e12081.
7. Picciotto S. et al., Front Bioeng Biotechnol (2022) 
10:830189.
8. Qui et al., Journal of cosmetic dermatology (2019) 
574–­581.
NATURE INSPIRATION MINIPROTEINS TO 
DEVELOP DERMO-­COSMETIC INGREDIENTS
T. Saguet*; H. Chajra; A. Tableau; N. Hulo; 
M. Machicoane; J.-­M. Le Doussal
Activen SA, Lausanne, Switzerland
Objective: Recent advances in the field of miniproteins 
open new perspectives in the health sector [1]. They present 
unique and valuable characteristics for cosmetic and derma-
tological applications: safety, bioavailability, stability and ef-
ficacy. Miniproteins represent a high diversity, they found in 
all kingdoms (animals, plants, fungi…). We present here our 
strategy to find and develop this new range of actives bioin-
spired by living systems, an inexhaustible natural source, 
while preserving the ecosystems of living systems.
Methods: By a screening on TGFβ activity, using our 
proprietary in silico Miniprotein discovery platform, 
SilicosTM, which contains the sequences of 100,000 mini-
proteins, we discovered XEP™-­716. Its global biological 
activity was studied by RNAseq in normal human dermal 
fibroblasts (NHDF) and its ability to stimulate collagen 
and hyaluronic acid was assessed in NHDF (Elisa) and in 
skin explants (immunohistochemistry). In a clinical proof 
of concept on 22 elderly volunteers applied XEP™-­716 or 
placebo to their faces twice daily for 28 and 84 days, wrin-
kles (expert analysis), elasticity (cutometer), skin tone and 
skin shininess (photographic analysis).
Results: XEP™-­716 RNAseq study reveals that 9368 genes 
were differentially regulated. TGFβ and XEP™-­716 upreg-
ulate and down regulate the same genes with the same 
level of expression (Correlation R2 = 0.72). XEP™-­716 up-
regulates the expressions of several genes crucial for skin 
integrity: alpha SMA, FGF2, elastin, procollagen I and IV 
(×4), B4GalT1 a gene which is involved in the synthesis 
of glycosaminoglycans (×2.33) and periostin, a protein 
critical for extracellular matrix restructuring (×1.66). The 
quantification of collagen expression at the protein level 
confirmed this boosting effect (×2.2). In contrast, the ef-
fect of XEP™-­716 is stronger than TGFβ on hyaluronic 
acid expression (×4 vs. ×1.33). After 84 days, XEP-­716 im-
proves skin wrinkles, skin firmness (+8%) and skin tone 
(+6%). Skin shininess, which is correlated with skin glow, 
was improved after 28 days (−15%).
Conclusion: Our SilicosTM platform offers a huge oppor-
tunity to develop innovative active ingredients. Our first 
Miniprotein discovered has antiaging potential. In vitro 
data clearly showed that XEP™-­716 has similar beneficial 
profile than TGFβ in fibroblasts and skin explants. These 
skin beneficial effects are confirmed in the clinical evalua-
tion, thus validated dermo-­cosmetic applications.
Keywords: miniproteins, in silico, growth factor, skin 
aging
References: [1] Crook Z.R., W Nairn N. W., Olson J. M., 
Trends Biochem Sci, 2020, 45: 332–­346.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 10 ===
10  |     
​ABS​TRACT
A BIOMI​MET​IC F​RAM​EWORK FOR 
SUSTAINABLE INNOVATION IN THE 
COSMETICS INDUSTRY
M. A. Kiser1,2,*
1Ayla Biomimicry,15 rue des Halles, Paris 75 001, France; 
2The Biomimicry Center, 850 SouthForest mall, Tempe, 
Arizona 85281, USA
Objective: Though a variety of sustainability perfor-
mance indicators exist [1], the cosmetics industry lacks 
a comprehensive sustainability framework. Nature is the 
best model and benchmarkof sustainability, and scien-
tists have identified key principles of nature that create 
and maintain systems that are simultaneously innovative 
and regenerative [2,3]. This study uses biomimicry –­the 
emulation of nature's principles and mechanisms to solve 
human challenges–­and sustainability metrics to create a 
nature-­inspired framework that can be used by research-
ers and companies to (1) evaluate how industry is per-
forming in terms of sustainability and (2) guide the design 
of new products (e.g. ingredients, formulas, packaging) 
such that they are both innovative and sustainable.
Methods: A literature review was done to study nature's 
principles of sustainability and to find examples of their 
application in industry. These principles and case studies 
were used to build a nature-­inspired framework that can 
be applied in cosmetics and related industries. Finally, the 
use of the framework was demonstrated in two different 
scenarios.
Results: The framework created in this study incorporates 
nature's key characteristics for sustainability–­described 
here as Evolving, Networked, Adaptive, Benign, Local, and 
Efficient (ENABLE). Each of these six characteristics are 
defined in detail. The application of the ENABLE frame-
work to the evaluation of an existing product showed the 
usefulness of the framework for highlighting the strengths 
and shortcomings of the product's sustainability perfor-
mance. In the scenario of designing a new product, the 
framework enabled greater integration of ecological prin-
ciples into the design. When compared to several existing 
sustainability approaches in the cosmetics industry, the 
ENABLE framework was found to be one of the most com-
prehensive and holistic, including but extending sbeyond 
the singular concepts of circular economy and naturality.
Conclusion: This study suggests that the application of na-
ture's sustainability principles to the cosmetics industry offers 
several potential benefits, including products and processes 
that are more innovative and ecologically regenerative, as 
well as more attractive communication about sustainability 
with the public and customers. The next steps to further de-
velop this work should include linking the ENABLE frame-
work to ecosystem services and benefit–­cost analyses.
Keywords: biomimicry, framework, sustainable innova-
tion, regenerative, systems thinking
References: [1] Kubler S., Rondeau E., Georges J.-­P., 
Mutua P.L., Chinnici M. Benefit–­cost model for compar-
ing data center performance from a biomimicry perspec-
tive. J. Clean Prod., 2019, 231: 817–­834.
[2] 
BaumeisterD.Biomimicry 
resourcehandbook: 
A 
seed bank of best practices, CreateSpace Independent 
Publishing Platform,2014: 33–­60.
[3] Koshland D.E.The seven pillars of life, Science, 2002, 
295: 2215–­2216.
DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW SUSTAINABLE 
COSMETIC CERAMIC PACKAGING
B. Sanjúan*; I. Ramos
Ayuna Less is Beauty Research, Bit Beauty S.L., Sant Feliu 
de Lobregat, Barcelona, Spain
Objective: Given the need to create a sustainable packag-
ing and the limitations of the different solutions that are 
being proposed in the market, the objective of this pro-
ject is to create a cosmetic packaging based entirely on 
ceramic (without plastic components) and high sustain-
ability, given that ceramic is a natural material, recyclable 
and reusable, with minimal environmental impact, that 
enhances the circular economy.
Methods: The validation of a design capable of hosting a 
cosmetic product has been carried out guided by extensive 
studies of compatibility and microbiological stability (in-
cluding the development of new protocols). In the process, 
the creation of an alternative closure system to the tradi-
tional thread has been crucial since ceramics do not allow it. 
As a solution, a closure has been devised based on the use of 
an O-­ring housed in a slit of the neck of the jar and with the 
design of the interior of the lid. This closure system, totally 
new for a cosmetic container, inevitably requires auxiliary 
elements, which represent a non-­significant percentage by 
weight with respect to the ceramic material, and whose use 
has been designed to be totally separable. These consist of 
an O-­ring located in the neck of the jar, a sealing of tightness 
in the mouth of the jar and an inner sealing disc for the lid.
Results: It has been possible to develop and validate the 
cosmetic use for this container with various cosmetic for-
mulations, guaranteeing the viability and use for the in-
dustry. Additionally, the container box has been designed 
to protect the material during shipping, without glues and 
creating an air chamber that minimizes the need for card-
board, supporting the optimization of resources. It is also a 
reusable object in itself: the beauty and minimalism of the 
design created once its use is fulfilled, give it the ability to ac-
commodate other uses once in the hands of the consumer.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 11 ===
|  11
ABSTR​ACT
Conclusion: It is possible to propose innovative packaging 
solutions that improve the sustainability and additionally 
create a beautiful and artistic design, conferring a value as 
a non-­disposable object beyond the packaging (cult item) 
and that allows educating the consumer in reuse.
Keywords: 
ceramic, 
natural, 
packaging, 
reuse, 
sustainable
GALACTINOL ADVANCED, FROM 
RESURRECTION PLANTS INSPIRATION TO 
SKIN RESILIENCE
C. Gonindard; E. Magdeleine; S. Delaunois; C. Delluc; 
R. ter Halle; L. Guillotin*; H. Chajra; M. Frechet
Clariant Active & Natural Origins, 135 Route d'Espagne, 
Toulouse 31036, France
Background: Among ages, Nature has developed tools and 
resources to constantly adapt to its environment being a 
model of innovation for the scientific community. Inspired 
from resurrection plants, known for their strong resilient 
properties to harsh climatic conditions, we developed 
Galactinol Advanced (GA) a sustainable white biotechnol-
ogy active ingredientable to improve skin resilience capac-
ity. This work presents how GA preserve sskin resilience 
and healthiness when exposed to drastic environmental 
conditions such as high temperature or UV or hydric stress.
Methods: Relying on literature showing that resurrec-
tion plants turn on genes responsible for plant resilience 
against dryness, we developed GA to address similar ben-
efits on human skin. GA relieson the valorization of ag-
ricultural by-­product through a water-­based biocatalytic 
reaction and has been designed in accordance with sus-
tainability gold standards. In vitro models of environmen-
tal stresses were developed using human cells exposed to 
various stresses: heat, hydric, combination heat + hydric, 
UVA and UVB. Hyaluronic acid was measured by Elisa. 
Clinical evaluation of the improvement of wrinkles and 
skin biomechanical properties was done on aged women. 
The impact of GA on skin health was studied thanks to 
skin metaproteomics technic focusing on microbiome.
Results: Interestingly, as shown in plants, the power-
ful activities of GA against biotic and abiotic stresses were 
translated experimentally on human skin cells exposed to 
environmental stresses. Besides GA stimulates hyaluronic 
acid. After 1 month of use, skin benefits were demonstrated 
as visible reduction of wrinkles' volume, improvement of 
skin elasticity and firmness.GA wasn't harmful to skin mi-
crobiome, keeping its composition stable.Metaproteomics 
study identified 4785 proteins, among them, 343 proteins 
were significantly modulated (from human, fungi and bacte-
rial origins) impacting positively skin healthiness: induction 
of antioxidant, metabolism, anti-­inflammation and extra-­
cellular matrixpathways.
Conclusion: We demonstrated that “galactinol”, a mol-
ecule described in plants as a “safeguarder” canbring a 
similar benefit to theskin mimickingtheresilience and 
healthinessobserved in the nature. As in plants, GA ac-
tivates defensemechanisms. Metaproteomics used for the 
first time on human skin clearly shows that modulating 
proteinsexpression at keratinocytes and microbiome lev-
els leads to visible beneficial outcomes.
Keywords: bioinspiration, skin resilience, microbiome, 
anti-­aging, extracellular matrix, metaproteomics
ALKYL POLYGLUCOSIDES AS A MEDIUM 
IN ULTRASONIC AND MICROWAVE 
MICEL​LAR​MED​IATED EXTRACTION 
FROM O. BASILICUM -­ EXPERIMENTAL, 
THEORETICAL, AND APPLIED RESEARCH
K. Śliwa*; N. Gałązka; P. Śliwa; M. Piątkowski
Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Cracow 
University of Technology, St Warszawska 24, Kraków 31–­
155, Poland
Objective: Ultrasonic and microwave-­assisted micellar-­
mediated extraction methods, based on green chemistry 
principles, appear to be an interesting alternative for ex-
tracting cosmetic raw materials, compared to classical 
extraction with organic solvents. Ocimum basilicum L. is 
widely used throughout the world. It contains essential 
oil and many compounds with antioxidant, antimicrobial, 
anti-­inflammatory, and anticancer properties. For this 
reason, basil can be used as a raw material in the cosmetic 
industry [1–­5].
Methods: In the present study, micellar extracts of 
Ocimum basilicum L. were obtained using aqueous solu-
tions of alkyl polyglucosides (APGs) with different carbon 
chain lengths, i.e. capryl glucoside, lauryl glucoside, and 
cocoyl glucoside. Extraction was assisted by microwaves 
(MAE) as well as ultrasounds (UAE). Extracts properties, 
such as antioxidant activity, total phenolic, and flavonoid 
contents, were measured using spectrophotometric and 
chromatographic methods.
Results: Generally, the determined concentration of 
antioxidants was higher for extracts obtained in the mi-
crowave field. The total content of polyphenols and fla-
vonoids was the greatest when the coconut glucoside 
was used. However, the extracts obtained with caprylic/
caprylic glucoside provided optimal antioxidant prop-
erties. Hair shampoo with micellar extract of basil had 
strong foaming properties and superior antioxidant activ-
ity compared to the base shampoo.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 12 ===
12  |     
​ABS​TRACT
Conclusion: Alkyl polyglucosides can be successfully 
used to obtain plant extracts. APG micelles improve the 
efficiency of the extraction process. They are non-­ionic, 
biodegradable surfactants that are safe and mild to the 
skin, so these extracts can find a wide range of cosmetic 
applications.
Keywords: micelle-­mediated extraction, basil, polyphe-
nols, flavonoids, antioxidant activity
References: [1] Sestili P., Ismail T., Calcabrini C., 
Guescini M., Catanzaro E., Turrini E., Layla A., Akhtar S.,
Fimognari C., Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism & 
Toxicology, 2018, 14: 679–­692.
[2] Rubab S., Bahadur S., Hanif U., Durrani A.I., Sadiqa 
A., Shafique S., Zafar U., Shuaib M., Urooj Z., Nizamani 
M.M., Biocatal. Agric. Biotechnol. 2021, 31, 1–­10.
[3] Do T.H., Truong H.B., Nguyen H.C., Pharm. Chem. J. 
2020, 54, 162–­169.
[4] Antonescu A.I., Miere F., Fritea L., Ganea M., Zdrinca 
M., Dobjanschi L., Antonescu A., Vicas S.I., Bodog F., 
Sindhu R.K., Plants, 2021, 10, 1–­19.
[5] Shahrajabian M.H., Sun W., Cheng Q., Int. J. Food 
Prop. 2020, 23, 1961–­1970.
METABOLOMIC ANALYSES OF FUNGUS-­
RESISTANT GRAPE VARIETIES (PIWI) 
CULTIVATED IN POLAND IN RELATIONTO 
THEIR ANTIO​XID​ANT​ACT​IVI​TIES TO 
DEVELOPACTIVE INGREDIENTSIN SKIN CARE 
FORMULATIONS
M. A. Malinowska1,*; M. Ferrier2; M.-­P. Gémin2; 
C. Abdallah2; N. Giglioli-­Guivarc'h2; C. Hano3; 
A. Lanoue2,*
1Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, 
Cracow University of Technology, 24 Warszawska 
St., Cracow 31–­155, Poland; 2EA 2106 Biomolécules 
et Biotechnologies Végétales, UFR des Sciences 
Pharmaceutiques, Université de Tours, 31 av. Monge, 
Tours F37200, France; 3Laboratoire de Biologie des 
Ligneux et des Grandes Cultures, INRA USC1328, 
Université de Orléans, Pôle universitaire d'Eure et Loire, 21 
rue de Loigny-­la-­Bataille, Chartres F28000, France
Objective: Grapevine presents a large cultivar diversity 
worldwide regarding; their use (wine or table), berry 
colour (black, red or white), maturity time (early, 
medium or late) and their tolerance to environmental 
stress like pathogen attack. The grapevine resistance is 
partly dependent on the capacity to accumulate ‘plant-­
specialized metabolites’ as polyphenols including 
phenolic acids, anthocyanins, flavonols, stilbenoids or 
condensed tannins. Besides antimicrobial activities, some 
of these compounds exhibit various biological activities 
relevant for cosmetics [1,2]. Among them, reactive oxygen 
scavenging activities are one of the crucial mechanism in 
the prevention of skin degeneration process, including 
accelerated aging.
Methods: In this study, we investigated the metabolic com-
position of 12 fungus-­resistant grape varieties also known 
as PIWI (German abbreviation of Pilswiederstangfähige) 
[3] collected in the Jura vineyards of Poland situated near 
Krakow. After performing the metabolomic profiling of 
hydroalcoholic berry extracts using UPLC-­DAD-­MS/MS, 
the relative and absolute quantification of metabolites was 
done. In vitro antioxidant activities of the corresponding 
extracts were assessed using ORAC, ABTS, DPPH, FRAP, 
CUPRAC and iron chelation assays and finally the pair-
wise correlations between polyphenol and antioxidant ac-
tivities were represented on heatmaps.
Results: The metabolomic profiling of PIWI varieties 
enabled the identification of 43 metabolites belonging to 
amino acids, anthocyanidins, flavan-­3-­ols, flavonols, phe-
nolic acids as well as monomeric and dimeric stilbenoids. 
We found positive correlations of several antioxidant 
activities (DPPH, ABTS, FRAP and CUPRAC) with an-
thocyanidins and negative correlations with stilbenoids, 
probably due to their low content in these extracts. We 
found no correlation between iron chelation property and 
any polyphenols.
Conclusion: The use of metabolomic approach makes it 
possible to screen the phytochemical composition of PIWI 
varieties and evaluate the key metabolites involved in the 
inhibition of accelerated skin aging.
Keywords: antioxidants, grape varieties, metabolomics, 
polyphenols
References: [1]Malinowska, M.A., Billet, K., Drouet, S., 
Munsch, T., Unlubayir, M., Tungmunnithum, D., Giglioli-­
Guivarc'h, N., Hano, C., Lanoue, A., Molecules, 2020, 
25:2203.
[2] Ferrier, M., Billet, K., Drouet, S., Tungmunnithum, 
D., Malinowska, M.A., Marchal, C., Dedet, S., Giglioli-­
Guivarc'h, N., Hano, C., Lanoue, A., Molecules, 2022, 
27:4029.
[3] Ehrhardt C, Arapitsas P, Stefanini M, Flick G, Mattivi 
F., J Mass Spectrom. 2014,49(9):860–­869.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 13 ===
|  13
ABSTR​ACT
NEW WAYS OF OBTAINING PHYTOACTIVES 
FOR COSMETIC PURPOSES
M. Laffon1,2,*; M. Ferrier1; M.-­P. Gémin1; C. Abdallah1; 
F. Michoux2; C. Lemoine2; C. Hano3; E. Destandau4; 
D. Da Silva4; M. A. Malinowska5; A. Lanoue1; 
N. Giglioli-­Guivarc'h1
1Faculty of Pharmacy, EA2106 Plant Biomolecules and 
Biotechnology, University of Tours, 31 Avenue Monge, 
Tours 37 200, France; 2EVONIK Advanced Botanicals, 220 
Rue Henri Potez, Parçay Meslay 37 210, France; 3EA1706 
Laboratory of Woody Plants and Crops Biology, University 
of Orléans, INRAe USC1328, Chartres 28 000, France; 
4Chemistry Department, University of Orléans, ICOA, 
UMR7311, Rue de Chartres, Orléans 45 100, France; 
5Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, 
Cracow University of Technology, 24 Warszawska St., 
Cracow 31–­155, Poland
The INNOCOSM project aims to find alternative sources 
for the production of phytoactives with cosmetic interest, 
especially using in vitro plant cultures and by-­products 
[1]. The research is focused on five plants of interest in the 
Centre-­Val de Loire region: two cultivated species (flax, 
vine) and three wild species (round-­leaved sundew, black 
poplar, alpine flax). After initiation and multiplication of 
in vitro cultures, the phytochemical composition of plant 
extracts is evaluated by comparing different conditions of 
in vitro cultures including Magenta™ box and Temporary 
Immersion bioreactor systems (RITA® reactors). The lev-
els of production in phytoactives is also compared with 
field cultures or wild conditions. Design Of Experiments 
(DOE) is used to improve the biomass production of 
organ cultures cultivated in bioreactors. Experiments 
of elicitation are planned to enhance the production of 
phytoactives.
Keywords: cosmetics; in  vitro culture; natural ingredi-
ents; phytochemistry; plant biotechnology; specialized 
metabolites
Reference: [1] Ferrier, M.; Billet, K.; Drouet, S.; 
Tungmunnithum, D.; Malinowska, M.A.; Marchal, C.; 
Dedet, S.; Giglioli-­Guivarc'h, N.; Hano, C.; Lanoue, A. 
Molecules 2022, 27, 4029.
UP-­CYCLING FROM CIDER INDUSTRY AS 
A SOURCE OF COSMETIC INGREDIENTS
A. Leverrier*; G.-­O. Maillet; N. Lemarié; J. Buchoux; 
A. Gilbert; C. Mervoyer; L. Blanchot; B. Touzeau; 
C. Laperdix; V. Mariette; S. Bredif; E. Mintet; C. Bordron
Groupe Rocher, R, I&D–­7 Chemin de Bretagne, 92130 Issy-­
Les-­Moulineaux
Objective: The use of food industry by-­products has be-
come a sustainable source of biomass and an opportunity 
to develop innovative bioactive cosmetic ingredients. To 
reveal the power of by-­products from Bretagne, we stud-
ied in particular the cider apple production. In France, 
apple is the first fruit consumed and apple trees represent 
41,000 ha of cultivated areas, among them 9000 ha are 
cultivated for cider varieties and the Breton region is the 
second French producer. Several phytochemical studies 
of Pyrus malus extract showed bioactive molecules with 
cosmetic potential.
Methods: Therefore, we decided to develop 3 new or-
ganic extracts from apple by-­products. First, the seeds 
were separated from the pomace and pressed to obtain 
apple oil rich in fatty acids. Then, the pomace free from 
seeds was distilled to obtain a water extract with volatiles 
and a hydroalcoholic extraction to yield an extract rich in 
polyphenols and sugars.
Results: For the first time, we demonstrated than the 
combination of these extracts increases protection, mois-
turizing and cell regeneration of the skin and their poten-
tial in natural cosmetic products.
Conclusion: In the respect of nature and its biodiversity, 
we introduce these actives extracts in our first organic cer-
tified family essential cares with sensorial and wellbeing 
feeling.
Keywords: eco-­extraction; natural organic cosmetics; 
Pyrus malus; skin care products; up-­cycling
ECO-­RESPONSIBLE WATER-­BASED 
EXTRACTION OF PLANT PIGMENTS
M. Chambaud1,*; R. Guyomarch2; E. Destandau1
1ICOA UMR 7311, Rue de Chartres, Orléans 45 067, 
France; 2Terre de Couleur, 6 Rue de Châtenay, 
Rochecorbon 37 210, France
Sustainability and naturality are more than ever a chal-
lenge in cosmetics. Consumers have become alert about 
the environmental and health impact of products. For 
these reasons, plant pigments are gaining attention. The 
extraction of actives is a key step to ensure greenness, 
safety and efficacy of the ingredients [1]. Using water as 
a green solvent prevents the use of organic solvents that 
are often hard to dispose of and a hazard for environment 
and users. Water is non-­toxic, non-­pollutant, inexpensive 
and easily accessible [1]. The main difficulties when using 
water as a solvent is the access to non-­polar compounds 
and the concentration of the extract that can be energy 
consuming [2]. The polarity of plant pigments varies from 
polar (anthocyans) to less polar (carotenoids) and water-­
based extraction is generally limited to polar pigments. 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 14 ===
14  |     
​ABS​TRACT
The aim of this study is to extend the extraction with 
water to less polar pigments. Madder (Rubia tinctorum L.) 
is a dye plant that contains anthraquinones, orange-­red 
compounds with a medium polarity. Tobe able to extract 
them we developed a water microwave assisted extraction 
(w-­MAE). During MAE, the high temperature and pres-
sure conditions lower the dielectric constant of water [3]. 
This increases the solubility and diffusivity of less polar 
compounds. After optimization by design of experiment, 
w-­MAE was more efficient than reference hydroalcoholic 
methods. Achiote (Bixa orellana L.) is a dye plant mainly 
valorized for its carotenoid content. However, it is also 
rich in polar polyphenolic compounds and less polar to-
copherols and tocotrienols that all contribute to its anti-
oxydant potential [4]. Abiphasic water/plant oil extraction 
was developed to simultaneously extract all compounds 
in a pre-­formulated extract. The combination of water 
and oil extracts has an interest in modulation of activity, 
stability and colour of the final ingredient. Optimization 
of extractions was thought of in terms of colour, but also 
composition, activity and formulability. All extracts were 
characterized by HPLC-­UV/DAD-­MS. Antioxydant and 
skin-­related enzymatic activities were assessed. Water-­
based extraction is an accessible and efficient alternative 
to conventional solvents. Madder and achiote extracts 
were studied as multifunctional potential ingredients for 
hair colouring.
Keywords: antioxidant; eco-­responsible extraction; mi-
crowave assisted extraction; plant pigments; water
References: [1] Chemat, F.; Abert Vian, M. A.; Ravi, H. 
K.; Khadhraoui, B.; Hilali, S.; Perino, S.; Fabiano Tixier, 
A.-­S. Review of Alternative Solvents for Green Extraction 
of Food and Natural Products: Panorama, Principles, 
Applications and Prospects. Molecules 2019, 24 (16), 3007.
[2] Roohinejad, S.; Nikmaram, N.; Brahim, M.; Koubaa, M.; 
Khelfa, A.; Greiner, R. Potential of Novel Technologies for 
Aqueous Extraction of Plant Bioactives. In Water Extraction 
of Bioactive Compounds; Elsevier, 2017; pp 399–­419.
[3] Destandau, E.; Michel, Microwave-­assisted Extraction. 
In Green Chemistry Series; Rostagno, M. A., Prado, J. 
M., Eds.; Royal Society of Chemistry: Cambridge, 2022; 
pp 144–­201.
[4] Quintero Quiroz, J. Q.; Torres, A. C.; Ramirez, L. M.; 
Garcia, M. S.; Gomez, G. C.; Rojas, J. Optimization of 
the Microwave-­Assisted Extraction Process of Bioactive 
Compounds from Annatto Seeds (Bixa orellana L.). 
Antioxidants 2019, 8 (2), 37.
AN INNOVATIVE STRATEGY INSPIRED 
BY NATURE TO PROTECT SKIN AGAINST 
DEHYDRATION
A. Mandeau1,*; P. Daigle2; M. Shortt3; J. Attia1
1IFF/Lucas Meyer Cosmetics, Toulouse, France; 2IFF/
Lucas Meyer cosmetics, Quebec, Canada; 3Southern Cross 
Botanicals PTY Ltd, New South Wales, Australia
Plants are continuously exposed to environmental 
changes and stress, such as drought episodes generating 
water shortages. To cope with this stress, plants developed 
three strategies: escape, avoidance or tolerance. One of 
the tolerance strategies used by plants is based on major 
molecular mechanisms such as osmotic adjustment, with 
the synthesis of solutes and ions to retain water content in 
the cell through reduction of the osmotic potential. This 
molecular mechanism inspired us to develop a strategy for 
skin cells to recover or protect themselves from dehydra-
tion stresses such as heat, repeated showers, sea or chlo-
rinated water.
To do so, a natural extract from Hibiscus sabdariffa L. 
calyx, known in Australia as “Wild Rosella,” was devel-
oped. This plant was selected because of it has naturalized 
and adapted to the drought conditions of the Australian 
climate and naturally produces high amount of organic 
osmolytes like betaine.
This Wild rosella extract demonstrated high capacity to 
improve in vitro cellular hydration through stimulation of 
intracellular water uptake (+73%*), maintenance of cell 
volume homeostasis, and increased expression of the or-
ganic osmolyte transporter TauT (+45%***). Ex vivo, the 
Wild rosella extract maintained and restored normal skin 
barrier function by increasing the synthesis of neutral li-
pids in stratum corneum (+20%** in preventive usage and 
+19%** as curative usage) and stimulating the production 
of the tight junction protein occludin.
Clinical efficacy was demonstrated in two distinct clinical 
trials. The first one, at 1% usage with single application (10 
women vs placebo) showed a rapid improvement of skin 
hydration on volunteers with normal to dry skin with ben-
efits lasting up to 72 h. The second clinical trials used a 2% 
application of Wild rosella extract compared to a placebo 
on 16 physically active women and men with dry skin and 
demonstrated the capacity of the extract to improve hy-
dration on challenged skin. Incorporated at 2% in a solid 
soap, it also protects the skin from dehydration (rinse-­off 
study vs. placebo on 20 volunteers).
By mimicking nature's tolerance strategy developed 
in plants to adapt and survive drought stress, the Wild 
Rosella extract is an innovative cosmetic active ingredi-
ent that reinforces the skin organic osmolytes strategy to 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 15 ===
|  15
ABSTR​ACT
simultaneously improve skin hydration by keeping cellu-
lar hydration and restore skin barrier function.
Keywords: biomimetics; Hibiscus sabdariffa L., hydra-
tion, osmolyte
STUDY OF THE CARNIVOROUS PLANT 
DROSERA sp. FROM IN VITRO CULTURES FOR 
THE SEARCH OF COSMETIC APPLICATIONS
R. Attia1,*; D. Da-­Silva1; L. Garros2; C. Hano2; C. Colas1,3; 
A. Lanoue4; N. Giglioli-­Guivarc'h4; E. Destandau1
1UMR7311, Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique, 
Université d'Orléans, CNRS, Orléans, France; 2USC1328 
Laboratoire de Biologie des Ligneux et des Grandes 
Cultures, Université d'Orléans, INRA, d'Orléans, France; 
3Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS-­Université 
d'Orléans, UPR 4311, 45 071 Orléans CEDEX 2, France; 
4EA2106 Biomolécules et Biotechnologies Végétales, 
Université de Tours, Tours, France
Drosera sp. (round-­leaved sundew) is a herbaceous insec-
tivorous plant from the Droseraceae family [1]. Extracts 
from this plant are used in cosmetic products as skin con-
ditioning agent and toning. Due to the substantial decline 
of Drosera habitat, the plant has been protected in most 
European countries, therefore wild Drosera has become 
unavailable to the industries [1]. Research has been ori-
ented towards the cultivation of Drosera using in vitro 
propagation. In this study we show the phytochemical 
composition of several sundew extracts from in vitro cul-
tures and their biological activities.
The modulation of in vitro culture parameters was car-
ried out by using various light elicitations (white, blue 
or red light) and by varying the pH and the composition 
of the culture medium (variable concentrations of sugar, 
chitosan and casein hydrolyzate). From the biomass pow-
ders, a green extraction was carried out using ultrasound 
and a water-­ethanol mixture (70/30) to obtain the Drosera 
sp. extracts. The comparison of the phytochemical profiles 
was made by UHPLC-­ESI-­Q-­TOF analysis.
Drosera sp. extracts showed a richness in phenolic com-
pounds. Particularly, ellagic acid and flavonols (like querce-
tin and myricetin) as well as their derivatives were detected 
by MS and MS/MS modes. Other phytochemical compounds 
characteristic of this genus: the naphthoquinones were 
also identified. The comparison of the Drosera sp. extracts' 
profiles (by non-­targeted metobolomics –­ ACP, PLs-­DA) 
demonstrated that varying culture conditions impact the 
production of these specialized metabolites. In addition, 
tested on tyrosinase and elastase, two important cosmetic 
target enzymes, Drosera sp. extracts showed a moderated in-
hibition on tyrosinase and an interesting activity on elastase. 
The search for other biological activities of these extracts 
such as inhibition of collagenase and hyaluronidase as well 
as antioxidant activities is in progress.
In conclusion, our study contributed to the phytochemical 
investigation of different sundew extracts obtained from 
in vitro culture with the aim of enhancing its bioactive me-
tabolites for applications in the cosmetics field.
Keywords: biological activities; carnivorous plant; 
Drosera sp. in vitro cultures; phytochemical study; special-
ized metabolites
Reference: [1] B. Baranyai, H. Joosten. Biology, ecology, 
use, conservation and cultivation of round-­leaved sundew 
(Drosera rotundifolia L.): a review, Mires and Peat, vol. 18, 
2016.
VALORIZATION OF FLAX SHIVES IN COSMETIC: 
CREATION OF AN INNOVATIVE SECONDARY 
PACKAGING
F. Bacoup1,*; H. Zmamou1; M. Vasseur1; M. Rosa1; 
J.-­B. Besnier1; N. Leblanc1; C. Vialla2; S. Tisse3; 
P. Cardinael3
1UniLaSalle, Univ.Artois, EA7519 -­Transformations & 
Agro-­ressources, Normandie Université, Mont-­Saint-­
Aignan 76 130, France; 2Maison de parfum BERRY 
–­Rouen; 3Laboratoire SMS-­EA3233, UNIROUEN, 
Normandie Université, Place Emile Blondel, Mont-­Saint-­
Aignan Cedex F-­76821, France
The LENEFIN collaborative project involves designing of 
flax-­based perfume by utilizing flax principal lyproduced 
here in Normandy, ideally two products: fragrance and 
secondary packaging. The project consortium worked to 
explore the whole flax plant for its possible valorization 
[1]. About secondary packaging part, the objective is to 
develop a modular and sustainable secondary packag-
ing, through employing an eco-­design approach, which is 
consisting of a central cylinder composed of long woven 
flax fibers and a base as well as a lid of identical shape 
produced from a mineral matrix supplemented with flax 
shives, a by-­product obtained during its scotching [2]. The 
work presented here will concern the base and the lid of 
the packaging. To achieve the desired shapes, the viscosity 
of the optimized formulation must allow the realization by 
moulding. The formulation of the basic cement matrix is 
as follows: 55% standard cement 42.5 MPa; 45% fine sand 
0–­2 mm. The role of sand is to maintain proper mechanical 
strength and provide a visually interesting mortar texture. 
This also makes it possible to avoid a smooth texture of a 
cement paste alone, which already exists in the market. To 
this basic mineral matrix, various concentrations of raw, 
crushed and mineralized flax shives [3,4] ranging from 5% 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 16 ===
16  |     
​ABS​TRACT
to 15% were attained (Figure 1). Mechanical tests (com-
pressive and flexural strength) at 28 days of hardening as 
well as wetting-­drying tests to evaluate the resistance to 
water and temperature were carried out for all the formu-
lations. The results indicated that 6% of flax shives previ-
ously crushed to 2 mm is the optimal dosage, while it was 
8% in case of mineralized flax shives. The water resistance 
tests have also demonstrated a high resistance to water for 
all the formulations, which is extremely positive for use 
in a high humidity environment, thus making it possible 
to envisage a wide range of applications for a second life.
References: [1] Gomez-­CamposA., Vialle C., Rouilly 
A., SablayrollesC., et Hamelin L., Journal of Cleaner 
Production,2021,281: 125177.
[2] Rahim M., Douzane O., Tran Le A.D., Promis G., 
Laidoudi B., Crigny A., Dupre B., Langlet T., Energy and 
Buildings, 2015,88: 91–­99.
[3] Kalia S., Kaith B. S., Kaur I., et Njuguna J., In Polymer 
Composites, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,2013, p.239–­288.
[4] Baley C., Bourmaud A., et Davies P., Composites Part 
A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 2021,144: 106333.
ZINGIBER OFFICINALE RHIZOME AS A 
SOURCE OF 6-­GINGEROL: ISOLATION AND 
PHARMACOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE 
PHENOLIC COMPONENT
W. Kukula-­Koch1,*; D. Tarabasz1; A. Angelis2; 
L. Antoniadi2; T. Braun3; K. Gaweł-­Bęben4; T. Jakschitz3; 
A. L. Skaltsounis2; G. K. Bonn3
1Department of Pharmacognosy with Medicinal Plants 
Garden, Medical University of Lublin, 1 Chodzki str., 
Lublin 20–­093, Poland; 2Division of Pharmacognosy and 
Natural Products Chemistry, Department of Pharmacy, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens 
15771, Greece; 3ADSI-­Austrian Drug Screening Institute 
GmbH, University of Innsbruck, Innrain 66a, Innsbruck 
6020 , Austria; 4Department of Cosmetology, University of 
Information Technology and Management in Rzeszów, 2 
Sucharskiego str., Rzeszów 35–­225, Poland
Objective: The aim of the study was to find the beneficial 
isolation conditions for 6-­gingerol –­ a pharmacologically 
precious phenolic constituent of the oleoresin obtained 
from the rhizomes of Zingiber officinale by means of cen-
trifugal partition chromatography (CPC) –­ in a high purity 
form, directly from the injection of crude extract.
Methods: Centrifugal partition chromatography oper-
ated in a gradient mode was used for the recovery of the 
phenolic component from the complex matrix of the gin-
ger oleoresin and high resolution HPLC-­MS instrument 
for the purity control of the isolate.
Results: 6-­gingerol was found to be one of the leading 
components of ginger rhizome methanolic extract. In 
the study CPC chromatography-­based isolation protocol 
was elaborated using a gradient of the following solvents: 
n-­hexane, ethyl acetate, methanol and water, with a de-
creasing water content to purify 6-­gingerol and separate 
the phenolic constituents from terpenes abundantly rep-
resented in the sample. The recovery of 6-­gingerol was 
achieved within 45 min of the analysis run and the ob-
tained purity of the component exceeded 92%. The com-
pound was later found to exhibit strong anti-­inflammatory 
potential towards the following cytokines: TNF-­alpha, IL-­
6, IP-­10, IL-­10, MCP-­1, IL-­1ra, RANTES, IL-­1 alpha, GM-­
CSF, TSLP.
Conclusion: CPC chromatography is capable for the 
isolation of high purity 6-­gingerol from the oleoresin of 
Zingiber officinale. The component was proved to have 
marked anti-­inflammatory properties.
Acknowledgements: The research was partly funded 
by the Polish National Science Centre project OPUS No 
2021/41/B/NZ4/00337.
Keywords: bioactivity, counter current chromatogra-
phy, isolation, phenolic compounds, Zingiber officinale, 
Zingiberaceae
A WATER-­BASED P. CRUEN​TUM​ EX​TRA​CTHAS 
DEMONSTRATED ITS PROTECTIVE EFFECT ON 
THE SKIN AGAINST UV RAYS AND POLLUTION 
IN IN-VITRO AND EX-­VIVO SKIN MODELS
C.Thebaud1,*; R. Pradelles1; N. Vandamme-Cissé1; JP. 
Arnaud2; V. Usache1; C. Houdin1
1Microphyt, 713 route de Mudaison, Baillargues 34 670, 
France; 2Terra Cosmetics
Objective: Porphyridium cruentum grows in the Negev 
desert where UVs exposure is high and produces mole-
cules as phycoerythrin involving in light energy harvest-
ing and exopolysaccharides known to chelate heavy metal 
ions. From this observation of nature, beneficial effects on 
the skin were assumed against UVs and pollution. In this 
FIGURE 1 Steps of implementation of the formulation 
with mineral matrix and flax shives.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 17 ===
|  17
ABSTR​ACT
sense, in-­vitro and ex-­vivo studies have been performed 
to demonstrate the ability of a water-­based extract from 
P. cruentumto protect the skin against UVs, blue light and 
urban pollution.
Methods: The water-­based P. cruentum extract character-
ized in phycoerythrin and exopolysaccharides was pro-
duced industrially.
This extract was tested on reconstructed human epider-
mis irradiated with UVs for sun burn cells quantification 
(Haematoxylin/Eosin staining) and on human skin ex-
plants exposed to UVs or to UVs and pollutants for DNA 
degradation assessment (γH2AX immunostaining).
The protective effect of glycerin with 5% of P. cruentum 
extract was evaluated by measuring the transmittance 
through PMMA sun plates before and after irradiation.
Results: The results obtained on RHE show that the ex-
tract has a significant decrease of 88% (p < 0.05) of the 
number of sunburn cells formed after UVs stress, com-
pared with untreated RHE.
The results obtained on explants exposed to UVs stress, or 
to UVs-­pollutants stress, demonstrate that:
The extract has a significant decrease of 85% (p < 0.01) of 
γH2AX expression in comparison with the negative con-
trol when the explant is exposed to pollution.
The extract has a significant decrease of 39% (p < 0.01) of 
γH2AX expression in comparison with the negative con-
trol when the explant is exposed to pollution and UVs.
The extract formulated in glycerin shows a protection fac-
tor of 15% (moderated action) against blue light.
Conclusion: The microalga extract has demonstrated 
through in-­vitro and ex-­vivo tests its protective effect on 
the skin against the harmful effects of UVs combined 
with pollution. As suggest, the mechanisms of action 
that can explain these results could be linked to the two 
contained molecules: the phycoerythrin (light harvesting 
pigment) and exopolysaccharides (heavy metals chela-
tors). Furthermore, the structure between phycoerythrin 
and bilirubin is close: the extract could activate the same 
mechanisms than the bilirubin and especially the NRF2 
pathway(a natural protection mechanism against oxidative 
stress).
Keywords: biomimetism, bluelight, microalga, pollution, 
UV
CARAMEL –­ A ROBUST ANALYTICAL STRATEGY 
TO SUPPORT R&D IN THE COSMETIC INDUSTRY 
FOR THE CHEMICAL PROFILING OF NATURAL 
INGREDIENTS
P. Darme; J. Thiery; A. Kotland; J. Hubert*
NatExplore SAS, Reims, France
The cosmetic sector is continuously evolving towards a 
much wider use of natural ingredients. There are today 
so many possibilities! Not only in terms of resources, from 
terrestrial plants to marine species, fungi, bacteria, or 
other microorganisms, but also in terms of green solvent 
opportunities and extraction processes. The resulting in-
gredients exhibit sometimes extraordinary chemical pro-
files, often highly complex. Such profiles must be carefully 
assessed with an overall and deep approach.
The CARAMEL strategy implemented at NatExplore re-
lies on a unique analytical workflow, which combines 
different technologies providing each key advantages to 
determine the chemical composition of natural extracts:
Liquid/liquid fractionation of the starting sample by 
Centrifugal Partition Chromatography produces a series 
of simplified metabolite mixtures without any loss of 
biomass.
NMR analysis of the fraction series enables the detection 
of organic molecules without discrimination between 
chemical classes, signal intensities being commensurate 
with relative metabolite concentration.
Hierarchical Clustering Analysis of 13C NMR signals col-
lected in the spectra of all fractions reveals the carbon fin-
gerprints of extract constituents on a heat map.
A database containing the chemical structures and pre-
dicted NMR values for ≈ 8500 natural molecules helps 
to quickly identify already known metabolites through 
dereplication.Rigorous interpretation of 1D and 2D NMR 
data enables the validation of database proposals or fur-
ther structural elucidation of the metabolites present in 
the extract, sometimes new for the species under exami-
nation, sometimes described for the first time!
High-­Resolution LC/MS of the starting extract brings 
complementary data for metabolite identification based 
on exact mass measurements.
The CARAMEL strategy is not destructive: at the end of 
the identification process, all fractions are dried and can 
be sent back to the owner for biological evaluation or com-
plementary orthogonal analyses.
Research efforts in the cosmetic industry are currently driven 
by strong regulatory constraints to produce natural extracts 
with a desired activity while meeting sustainability and 
safety targets. In this context the CARAMEL strategy appears 
as a robust tool which can really help R&D teams of cosmetic 
companies to chemically profile their natural ingredients.
Keywords: naturality, bio-­sourcing, chemical profiling, 
nuclear magnetic resonance, dereplication
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 18 ===
18  |     
​ABS​TRACT
DEVELOPMENT OF COSMETIC PRODUCTS 
GUIDED BY SCIENCE ANDTECHNOLOGY
D. Chandrinou1; A. Argyropoulou1,*; G. Papaefstathiou1; 
M. Halabalaki2; L. Skaltsounis2
1PharmaGnose S.A., 57th km Athens-­Lamia National 
Road, Oinofyta, 32 011; 2Division of Pharmacognosy and 
Natural Products Chemistry, Department of Pharmacy, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
Panepistimioupoli, Zografou, Athens 15 771, Greece
Cosmetic products are far from being used just for cleans-
ing, beautifying, perfuming, or changing the appearance.
Nowaday they combine clinically proven ingredients with 
patented delivery systems. Cosmetic research targets to 
products that are efficient and effective, taking into con-
sideration novel concept such as personalization, while 
it embraces environmental protection, circular economy 
and sustainability [1].
PharmaGnose is a spin off company that specializes on 
plant natural products. Among its activities is research 
that can be incorporated in cosmetics. The development 
of a cosmetic product, ever more, requires high-­level re-
search in a variety of fields combining chemistry, biology, 
biotechnology, etc.
Aromatic and medicinal plants and their phytochemicals 
are multifunctional because they possess various properties 
like photoprotection, antiaging, moisturizing, antioxidant, 
astringent, anti-­irritant, and antimicrobial activity. Healing, 
softening, rejuvenating and sunscreen effects have been at-
tributed to herbal extracts. In addition, several compounds 
such as triterpenoids, saponins, tannins, phenols, flavonoids, 
and alkaloids have been proven to have a positive effect on 
many physiochemical processes. Greece has great floris-
tic wealth, having a rich heritage in aromatic and medici-
nal plants and considered one of the global ecological “hot 
spots.” It consists of approximately 6.000 species of higher 
plants. Furthermore, valuable products can be obtained from 
by-­products of the agricultural activity, like olive and wine.
Herein, the study of various plant species of the Greek 
flora (Cistus, Rosaetc) as well as by-­products (olive, wine) 
will be presented towards their development in cosmetic 
ingredients. The raw materials were extracted with various 
techniques, focusing on the use of “green” extraction pro-
cedures. Their chemical profile, specifically their content 
in bioactive compounds was studied with analytical meth-
odologies such as HPTLC, HPLC-­DAD/ELSD and UPLC-­
HRMS. Furthermore, the potential of the plants/extracts 
in skin care was evaluated. The extracts were screened for 
their antioxidant, anti-­melanogenic, anti-­elastase, anti-­
collagenase and anti-­hyaluronidase properties. It was 
found that the plants/extracts contained promising natu-
ral products with high structural diversity that could be of 
great value for the cosmetic industry, since they combine 
interesting chemical profiles and promising properties 
against specific targets involved in skin aging.
Keywords: anti-­aging, by-­products, chemical profile, ex-
traction, Greek flora, natural products
References: [1] Costa E. F., Magalhães W. V., and Di 
Stasi L. C., Molecules, 2022,27: Article number 7518.
[2] Sklirou A. D., AngelopoulouM. T., ArgyropoulouA., 
ChaitaE., BokaV. I., Cheimonidi C., Niforou K., 
Mavrogonatou E., Pratsinis H., Kalpoutzakis E., Aligiannis 
N., Kletsas D., Trougakos I. P., and Skaltsounis A. L., 
Antioxidants, 2021, 10:1206.
[3] NunesA., MartoJ., GonçalvesL., MartinsA.M., FragaC., 
and RibeiroH.M., Int. J. Food Sci., 2022, 57:173–­187.
WHEN PRIMATE BEHAVIOUR INSPIRES 
COSMETIC INNOVATIONS
A. Queiroz*; A. le Tirant; C. Gavory; J. Madec
SEQENS Cosmetics (ID bio), 8 rue de Rouen, Porcheville 
78 440, France
Objective: Through this research project, we want to 
highlight the interest of exploring zoopharmacognosy 
(i.e. the behaviour of animals consuming plants to treat 
themselves) at dermatological level. To identify molecules 
of interest for skin disorders, such as inflammation, sev-
eral animal self-­medication behaviours were thus ana-
lysed to find molecules likely to modulate those biological 
pathways.
Methods: Several plants were selected based on their 
specific use by animals. A solid–­liquid extraction was per-
formed on certain plants such as Aframomum melegueta 
seeds, used by gorillas and preventing them from fatal 
heart disease thanks to its anti-­inflammatory properties. 
To prove the efficacy at Human skin level, explants were 
inflamed with a cytokine cocktail. After treatment with 
Aframomum melegueta extract, RNA extraction and PCR 
analysis were performed. To demonstrate clinical effects, 
volunteers were asked to apply emulsions containing the 
active or the placebo. SDS patches at 1% were applied for 
24 h before the treatment. Measurements were recorded 
at D0, after 24 h and 5 days: skin transepidermal water 
loss (TEWL) and skin vascularization (haemoglobin 
image).
Results: At ex vivo level, A. melegueta extract treatment 
decreases IL-­22 expression, increases IL-­10 expression 
during the inflammation process and TGF-­β expression 
after stress, both pro-­resolving / anti-­inflammatory cy-
tokines, showing that the resolution phase is enhanced by 
the extract.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 19 ===
|  19
ABSTR​ACT
At clinical level, after 1 day of use, A. melegueta extract at 
3% significantly inhibited TEWL by 15% (p < 0.05 vs. D0) 
compared to D0. A significant difference of TEWL was 
also observed between the treatment and the placebo after 
1 day of use (p < 0.05 vs. placebo).
After 5 days of use, A. melegueta extract at 3% significantly 
reduced by 50% (p < 0.05 vs. D0) skin vascularization and 
skin redness, compared to D0. A significant difference of 
vascularization was also observed between the treatment 
and the placebo after 5 days of use (p < 0.05 vs. placebo).
Conclusion: This bioinspired approach allowed us to 
identify different plants naturally used by animals to ad-
dress endpoints of interest for the human skin. As an ex-
ample, A. melegueta seeds used by gorillas inspired the 
development of a new active to limit chronic skin inflam-
mation. A. melegueta seeds extract reduces TEWL and 
vascularization, thus improving skin barrier function and 
reducing skin redness.
Keywords: bioinspiration, biomimicry, ethology, self-­
medication, zoopharmacognosy
BIOGUIDING MICROORGANISMS TO PRODUCE 
INNOVATIVE NATURAL ACTIVE INGREDIENTS
L. Verzeaux*; S. Mazalrey; C. Grimaldi; C. Soulié; 
B. Closs
SILAB, Brive, France
Objective: This study aimed to use the SILAB's exper-
tise in biotechnology as a lever of innovation to produce 
natural active ingredients. Indeed, microorganisms have 
singular metabolism and they produce specific molecules 
allowing them a great adaptability to survive under differ-
ent stresses.
Methods: To improve skin suffering from dryness, SILAB 
paid a special attention on Lactobacillus (L.) arizonensis, a 
probiotic strain from jojoba, known for its ability to adapt 
to extreme dry conditions. The natural environment of 
this bacteria was reproduced by SILAB by adding jojoba to 
bioguide its metabolic power.
To produce depigmenting sulfur-­containing molecules, 
SILAB identified Ogataea siamensis, a yeast able to me-
tabolize the rare nutrients present on the aerial parts of its 
host plant thanks to the production of sulfur-­containing 
molecules. This intrinsic property was boost through a 
unique SILAB bioguiding process by adding cysteine, 
an indispensable precursor for the synthesis of sulfur-­
containing molecules. The production of sulfur-­contained 
peptides of interest was followed thanks to the quantifica-
tion of glutathione, a tracer metabolite.
Results: Lactobacillus arizonensis has bio-­converted jojoba 
into a postbiotic rich in innovative active molecules: the cyclic 
polyols. Then, a patented process was applied on the superna-
tant, produced at the industrial scale, to purify active mole-
cules of interest. Interestingly, this postbiotic has an efficiency 
on the quality of dry skins. Indeed, it reinforces the integrity 
of the cutaneous barrier and activates the epidermal renewal 
while preserving the balance of the cutaneous microbiota.
The bioguiding process applied to Ogataea siamensis in-
creases the glutathione production by 6 times compared to 
the original process. This dedicated process was followed 
by an enzymatic extraction step. The resulting natural ac-
tive ingredient, containing sulfur-­containing peptides pre-
sents a capacity of limiting the production of melanin by 
melanocytes. The appearance of spots is attenuated, the 
uniformity of complexion is improved, and the complex-
ion radiance is revived for a global depigmenting effect.
Conclusion: Mastering the bioguiding processes offers 
a sustainable and safe alternative to the scarcity of natu-
ral resources for a preserved biodiversity. Inexhaustible 
source of high value-­added molecules, these micro-
scopic cell factories combined with multiple biotechno-
logical approaches brings a new field of possibilities to 
cosmetics.
Keywords: bacteria, bioguiding, biotechnology, microor-
ganisms, yeast
ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITY AND VITAMIN E 
IN OIL FROM BLACK SOLDIER FLY LARVAE 
(HERMETIA ILLUCENS) EXTRACTED WITH 
SUPERCRITICAL CO2 AS A POTENTIAL RAW 
MATERIAL FOR COSMETICS
V. A. Cruz; N. J. Ferreira; A. L. Oliveira*
Faculdade de Zootecnia e Engenharia de Alimentos, 
Universidade de São Paulo, av. Duque de Caxias Norte, 
225, Pirassununga, São Paulo, CEP 13.635–­900, Brazil
Objectives: Black soldier fly larvae (Hermetia illucens) 
have been attracting research attention due to their nu-
tritional composition, which has a high content of pro-
teins and lipids, with the latter being the second highest 
of its macronutrient contents. Supercritical fluid extrac-
tion (SFE) has many advantages, and importantly among 
is that it does not leave toxic residues in the extracts and 
so is characterized as a green and clean extraction pro-
cess. Furthermore, the product obtained can be directly 
applied in cosmetics, drugs and foods, depending on its 
composition. Different methodologies for extracting these 
lipids have been applied, among them, extraction with su-
percritical CO2 (scCO2) stands out. Our objectives were 
to investigate the different conditions of SFE with scCO2 
without and with ethanol as cosolvent in order to compare 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 20 ===
20  |     
​ABS​TRACT
the yields and the antioxidant activities and tocopherol 
contents.
Methods: The optimized extraction conditions employed 
in SFE were 30 MPa and 60°C and a flow rate of 10 g of 
scCO2/min. In the extractions with cosolvent, 10% of eth-
anol was used in relation to the mass of CO2. Antioxidant 
activity was determined by methods employing DPPH• 
free radicals and ABTS• + radical stabilization, and to-
copherol content was determined by HPLC.
Results: The extraction yields without and with co-­
solvents were 32.23% and 36% respectively, which repre-
sents 95% and 106.1% recovery of the oil present in the 
flour. Obviously, the extract obtained with ethanol, as 
a polarity modifier, extracted other polar compounds, 
which explains why the percentage result is greater than 
100%. The antioxidant activities in the oils, determined 
using free radicals of DPPH• without and with cosolvent, 
were 6.15 and 8.57 μg trolox equivalent (TE)/g of oil, re-
spectively, and radical stabilization ABTS• + resulted in 
0.5 and 2.03 μmol TE/g of oil. In both cases, the oil ob-
tained had a higher content of minor compounds due to 
the use of cosolvent and showed greater antioxidant activ-
ity. Black soldier fly larvae oils obtained with and without 
ethanol as a co-­solvent had a total tocopherol content of 
69.0 and 74.0 mg/kg, respectively, a high vitamin E con-
tent. Vitamin E also has the function of inactivating oxida-
tive reactions and strengthening the immune system.
Conclusion: When compared to vegetable oils, these 
oils showed higher antioxidant activities than some plant 
sources. Antioxidant properties are increasingly gaining 
importance due to their ability to delay aging; hence the 
importance of their evaluation. Given these characteris-
tics, soldier fly larvae oils are a potential raw material for 
cosmetic products.
Keywords: antioxidant, black soldier fly, cosmetics, lipids
ANTI-­AGING POTENTIAL OF A ROSA 
CENTIFOLIA STEM EXTRACT WITH FOCUS 
ON PHYTOCHEMICAL COMPOSITION BY 
BIOGUIDED FRACTIONATION
C. Dubois1,*; X. Fernandez1; G. Verger-­Dubois2
1Université Côte d'Azur, Institut de Chimie de Nice, 28 
Avenue Valrose, Nice 06100, France; 2NissActive, Pépinière 
InnovaGrasse, Espace Jacques-­Louis lions, 4 traverse 
Dupont, Grasse 06130, France
Agricultural practices generate huge amounts of by-­
products, often simply discarded as waste that must be 
processed at some cost. The natural by-­products reval-
orisation as raw material to produce high-­added value in-
gredients for various industrial sectors may pave the way 
towards more sustainable industrial practices, via an opti-
mized utilization of natural resources.
Integrating the circular economy precepts to production 
systems is considered to be a more and more promising 
management solution to significantly reduce the environ-
mental impact of economic activities. To do so, the cosmetic 
potential of 30 extracts obtained by maceration of agricul-
tural by-­products in a hydroalcoholic solvent was evalu-
ated: their activities, as well as their inhibitory activities of 
specific enzymes were assessed in vitro to identify those that 
could be used effectively as anti-­aging actives while meet-
ing the consumer's expectations in terms of sustainability, 
naturality, transparency and traceability [1].
This communication discusses the valorisation of Rosa 
centifolia stem to produce a natural extract with cosmetic 
anti-­aging potential. A hydroalcoholic extract of R. cen-
tifolia stem revealed itself particularly promising due to 
its valuable anti-­hyaluronidase and antioxidant activities, 
and its interesting anti-­elastase and anti-­inflammatory po-
tential. The bio-­guided fractionation of this extract allows 
the characterization of three major compounds, e. g., iso-
quercitrin, quercitrin and euscaphic acid, never identified 
in R. centifolia previously [2,3].
References: [1] H. Plainfossé, P. Burger, G. Verger-­
Dubois, S. Azoulay, X. Fernandez, ‘Design methodology 
for the development of a new cosmetic active based on 
Prunus domestica L. leaves extract’, Cosmetics 2019, 6, 8.
[2] C. Dubois, H. Plainfossé, M. Delcroix, M. Trinel, G. 
Verger-­Dubois, S. Azoulay, P. Burger, X. Fernandez, 
‘Anti-­aging potential of a Rosa centifolia stem extract with 
focus on phytochemical composition by bioguided frac-
tionation’, Chemistry & Biodiversity 2022, 19.
[1] H. Plainfossé, P. Burger, S. Azoulay, G. Verger-­Dubois, 
X. Fernandez, ‘Extrait de tiges de rosier, composition com-
prenant l'extrait et l'utilization cosmétique dudit extrait et 
de la composition’.
(FR3099370A1), 2019.
Keywords: anti-­aging potential, chemical composition, 
co-­products, green chemistry, Rosa centifolia L. stem, 
upcycling
FORGOTTEN PERFUMERY PLANTS: 
FRAGRANCE REVELATION FOR INNOVATION
K. Da Fonte1,*; A. S. Bouville1,2; P. Portes2; 
J. C. Lhommet2; X. Fernandez1
1Institut de Chimie de Nice, UMR 7272 Université Côte 
d'Azur/CNRS, Nice 06108, France; 2Laboratoires M&L, 
Groupe L'Occitane, Manosque 04100, France
From the Neolithic period to nowadays, perfumes have 
existed throughout the ages with different uses, forms, 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 21 ===
|  21
ABSTR​ACT
raw materials, and fragrances. During Neolithic times, 
they were used as offerings to the Gods. Over time, their 
functions evolved: funeral, religious, spiritual, medicinal, 
cosmetic, or erotic pleasure vector. In terms of raw mate-
rials, perfumes used to be exclusively made up of natural 
ingredients, essentially vegetal. These ingredients were 
often aromatic plants which were used at the same time 
in cosmetics, medicines, and food. Since the 19th century, 
synthetic perfumery molecules have started to be used 
more and more in perfume composition, to the point of 
becoming the majority today [1–­4].
Across the ages, some plants, such as Rose, Jasmine, or 
Iris, have been used in perfumery since Antiquity. Others 
have been used during certain periods and are no longer 
used today. Sometimes, this disuse can be easily ex-
plained: substitution by a synthetic ingredient or prohibi-
tion by regulations. But in other cases, the reason certain 
plants have stopped being used for perfumery may remain 
unknown [1].
These forgotten plants of perfumery could nevertheless 
represent a source of innovation for the perfumery of to-
morrow. It thus seemed essential to us to study them, to 
understand the reason of they were no longer used and 
to evaluate their potential of revalorization. Several hun-
dreds of books have been studied, some dating back to 
Antiquity, and many multidisciplinary experts were inter-
viewed. Information was collected as to identity, history, 
symbolism, uses, smell, medicinal properties, and hypoth-
eses on the plant discontinuance. Thus, a database con-
taining more than eight hundred perfumery plants was 
created.
This study also enabled us to rediscover past smells, some 
of them being completely unique. In the meantime, this 
work permitted to highlight four main reasons for explain-
ing that certain plants have been forgotten in perfumery: 
evolution of olfactory trends, availability and knowledge 
of resources, development of organic synthesis and regu-
lations, recommendations, and precautionary principles. 
This R&D work allowed us to better understand and sci-
entifically study some plants of the past; while trying to re-
valorize them on an industrial scale, keeping an approach 
to biodiversity in the process.
Keywords: fragrance, history, innovation, perfumery, 
plants
References: [1] J-­P Brun and X Fernandez, Parfums an-
tiques: de l'archéologue au chimiste, Silvana, Cinisello 
Balsamo, Milano (2015).
[2] A Le Guérer, Parfum (Le): Des origines à nos jours, 
Odile Jacob, (2005).
[3] P Faure, Parfums et aromates de l'Antiquité, Fayard, 
Paris (1987).
[4] F Ghozland, X Fernandez and E de Feydeau, L'herbier 
parfumé histoires humaines des plantes à parfum, Plume 
de carotte, Toulouse (2010).
PHYTOCHEMICAL STUDY OF BIOACTIVE 
PLANTS CULTIVATED IN CENTRE-­VAL DE 
LOIRE, FRANCE
A. Le Cabec1; C. Colas2; P.E. Campos1; O. Yzebe3; 
E. Destandau1,*
1Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique (ICOA), UMR 
7311, Université d'Orléans, France; 2Centre de biophysique 
Moléculaire (CBM), UPR 4301, CNRS-­Université 
d'Orléans, France; 3Centre de Développement Horticole 
Région Centre (CDHRC), St-­Cyr-­en-­Val, France
The Ayurveda traditional medicine used nearly 1500 
plants [1], making the Ayurveda a huge source of bioactive 
compounds. However, reap wild plants in a far country 
can have an important environmental impact and could 
be submitted to restrictive regulations, therefore develop 
suitable culture methods to produce them in France can 
be a good alternative. Culture conditions can also be con-
trolled and optimized to guarantee the quality of the veg-
etal biomass. However, the phytochemical composition 
and the biological properties of a cultivated plant, that 
grows under another climate with less abiotic stress, com-
pared to the wild one could be different. Therefore, it is 
important to confirm the activity of these cultivated plant 
through a metabolomic and bioassay activity studies.
Eclipta alba and Coleus forskohlii, are two plants from the 
Ayurveda, traditionally used for cutaneous trouble, hair 
promoter or antibacterial activity [2–­3]. These plants are 
cultivated in the Centre-­Val de Loire Region (France) at 
the CDHRC in an objective of diversification of the culti-
vated plant species and their ways of valorisation. A me-
tabolomics study of the ethanolic extracts was undertaken 
and in vitro bioactive assays were realized in parallel to 
correlated results and highlight molecules of interest. We 
are especially looking for inhibition of enzymes involved 
in skin aging and inflammation process as collagenase, ty-
rosinase, elastase, cyclooxygenase-­2 and xanthine oxidase 
[4–­6]. Different cultured conditions could be tested to de-
termine the impact of the conditions on the biomass and 
bioactivity.
Our research on E. alba has led to identified markers of 
the plant, like demethylwedelolactone, wedelolactone 
and eclalbasaponins. The activity of polar compounds like 
coumestans and flavonoids to inhibit cyclooxygenase-­2 
and xanthine oxidase was confirmed and a new activity 
of inhibition of collagenase has been identified. Then, our 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 22 ===
22  |     
​ABS​TRACT
methodology will be developed on C. forskohlii to deter-
mine the optimal culture conditions.
The study of cultivated E. alba confirmed the anti-­
inflammatory and antioxidant activity and identified an 
anti-­collagenase activity. These results make CDHRC's 
E. alba a good candidate for the development of anti-­aging 
products. C. forskohlii will be soon study thanks a me-
tabolomics approach to connect culture conditions to the 
chemical composition and bioactivity.
Keywords: anti-­aging, anti-­inflammatory, enzymatic 
assay, mass spectrometry, metabolomics
References: [1] Kumar S. et al, J Evid Based 
Complementary Altern Med, 2017, 22(3), 494–­501.
[2] Jahan R. et al, International Scholarly Research 
Notices, 2014, 1–­22.
[3] Malleswari D. et al, J Nat Prod Plant Resour, 2013, 3(4), 
75–­78.
[4] Deniz F. et al, South African Journal of Botany, 2020, 
vol 132, 277–­288.
[5] Kurumbail R. et al, Nature, 1996, vol 384, 644–­648.
[6] Cos P. et al, Journal of Natural Products, 1998, vol 61, 
71–­76.
ANTI-­AGING AND ANTI-­INFLAMMATORY 
PROPERTIES OF MAJOR OLIVE OIL 
SECOIRIDOIDS
T. Nikou1; O. Gualillo2; I. P. Trougakos3; M. Halabalaki1; 
L. A. Skaltounis1,*
1Division of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products 
Chemistry, Department of Pharmacy, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, 
Athens 15 771, Greece; 2Laboratory of Neuroendocrine 
Interactions in Rheumatology and Inflammatory 
Diseases, Santiago University Clinical Hospital, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain; 3Department of Cell Biology and 
Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Athens 15 784, 
Greece
Objective: Olive oil (OO) is widely accepted as a superior 
edible oil. Great attention has been given lately to OO se-
coiridoids which are linked to significant health beneficial 
effects [1]. Oleacein and oleocanthal are the most studied 
compounds, while limited data exist in literature for the 
rest secoirioids. In the current study a pioneering meth-
odology with pilot-­scale potentials was employed for the 
extraction of OO and the further isolation of major olive 
oil secoiridoids. The compounds were isolated in high 
amounts and purity and then tested in vitro for their anti-­
aging and anti-­inflammatory potential.
Methods: OO samples from an in-­house library were 
quantified for their content in oleocanthal and oleacein. 
An OO sample rich in these compounds was selected 
for the isolation process. The selected OO sample was 
extracted with Centrifugal Partition Extraction (CPE), 
the extract was fractionated with Centrifugal Partition 
Chromatography (CPC) and the enriched fractions in 
secoiridoids were purified with preparative HPLC-­DAD. 
The pure compounds were tested on a human chondro-
genic highly differentiated cell line for the determination 
of compounds anti-­inflammatory properties and on nor-
mal human skin fibroblasts (BJ cells) for their anti-­aging 
potential.
Results: Totally eight secoirioids were isolated in differ-
ent isomeric forms. Secoirioids with a phenylalcohol part 
were more potent on chondrogenic cells, while the 8S iso-
meric forms reveal higher activity in comparison to the 
corresponding 8R configuration. Oleacein and oleocan-
thal protected cells from aging mediated toxicity on BJ 
cells.
Conclusion: The employed methodology was success-
fully applied on OO for the isolation of major secoiridoids. 
The isolated compounds showed anti-­aging and anti-­
inflammatory activity.
Keywords: anti-­aging, anti-­inflammatory, olive oil, se-
coiridoids, in-vitro
Acknowledgements: The present work was carried out 
and co-­funded by the European Regional Development 
Fund (ERDF) and Greek national funds through the 
Operational Program “Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship 
and Innovation”, under the call “RESEARCH –­ CREATE 
-­ INNOVATE” (project: Oliveheart -­ Τ1ΕΔΚ-­02434).
References: [1] Emma MR., Auggello G., Di Stefano V., 
Azzolina A., Giannitrapani L., Montalto G., Cervello M., 
Cusimano A. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 
2021, 22(3):1234.
HAIRY ROOT CULTURES OF POPLAR: 
A POTENTIAL SOURCE OF COSMECEUTICALS
S. Malik1,*; M. Bruat1; M. Laffon1; S. Heng1; C. Colas2; 
É. Destandau2; F. Héricourt1; C. Depierreux1; 
F. Chefdor1; S. Carpin1; F. Lamblin1,*
1LBLGC, University of Orléans, INRAE, USC1328, 
Orléans 45 067, Cedex 2, France; 2Institute of Organic and 
Analytical Chemistry-­ICOA, University of Orléans-­CNRS, 
UMR 7311, Orléans BP6759, France
Objective: The rising consumers' demand for natural 
based products drive cosmetics industries to look for al-
ternate source of plant-­derived bioactive compounds to 
be used in their various formulations and as packaging 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 23 ===
|  23
ABSTR​ACT
material. The aim of the present study is to explore the 
potential of local grown Poplar tree species of Centre-­Val 
de Loire region (France), using in vitro hairy root culture 
system for the sustainable production of bioactive com-
pounds especially to be used as natural preservatives or 
for various other cosmetic applications.
Methods: Hairy roots of hybrid poplar (P. trem-
ula♀ × P. alba ♂) were generated from in vitro leaves using 
different wild type strains of Agrobacterium rhizogenes i.e. 
A4, 15 834, MSU 440 and LBA 9402 on Murashige and 
Skoog (1962) medium supplemented with acetosyrin-
gone. Selected hairy root lines were grown further, char-
acterized using UPHLC-­MS and assayed for antioxidant 
activities.
Results: Hairy roots were obtained after 15–­20 days of 
infection with all the strains, however, 100% transforma-
tion efficiency was found with A. rhizogenes strain 15 834 
and MSU 440. Hairy roots so attained were cultured on 
MS medium without plant growth regulators. It was perti-
nent to add polyvinyl pyrrolidone in the medium for sus-
tainable hairy roots growth and to avoid browning. Hairy 
roots were further inoculated to liquid media and then up-
scaled successfully to 2 L capacity flask. Chemical analyses 
showed that all the strains had similar profiles with only 
some quantitative differences. Twelve major compounds 
were detected including catechin, nigracin, salireposide, 
trichocarpin and tremulacin based on literature studies. 
Root extracts showed antioxidant activity.
Conclusion: This is the first report of establishment of 
reliable protocol for hairy root induction and sustainable 
growth in hybrid poplar. The compounds produced in 
hairy roots exhibited antioxidant activities that could be 
used for cosmetic formulations. Further studies to upscale 
the hairy roots production using temporary immersion 
system are underway.
Keywords: Agrobacterium rhizogenes, bioactive com-
pounds, genetic transformation, in vitro culture, special-
ized metabolites, woody plant species
SOILLESS CULTURE IN POPULUS NIGRA: AN 
ALTERNATIVE APPROACH TO COLLECT ROOT 
EXUDATES FOR COSMETIC APPLICATIONS
M. Bruat*; S. Malik; M. Laffon; S. Heng; F. Héricourt; 
C. Depierreux; F. Chefdor; S. Carpin; F. Lamblin*
LBLGC, University of Orléans, INRAE, USC1328, Orléans 
45 067, Cedex 2, France
Objective: To meet the ever-­growing consumers demand, 
cosmetic manufacturers are seeking natural ingredients 
especially derived from plants and produced in an envi-
ronmentally friendly way. In this regards, soilless culture 
using hydroponics and aeroponics, a rapidly emerging 
technology to obtain plant or plant products without con-
straint of climate conditions is an alternative. To check 
the feasibility of this technique for root exudates collec-
tion from Populus nigra (of local interest and sourcing 
material of Centre-­Val de Loire region, France) in order to 
enrich modern cosmetic products is the main objective of 
the present study.
Methods: The cuttings of P. nigra were grown in magenta 
boxes containing 300 mL Murashige & Skoog liquid me-
dium either in ¼, ½ or full strength. For root induction, 
Indole Butyric Acid (IBA, 1.0 mg/L) was added to the me-
dium. After root emergence and shoot growth, plants were 
cultured in big batches with 10 L media by employing two 
different systems (a) hydroponics and (b) aeroponics. 
The two culture systems were compared in terms of root 
growth and sustainable production of root exudates. Root 
exudates were collected during different time intervals 
(5, 24 and 48 h) and lyophilized for further analyses.
Results: Root initiation was observed from cuttings after 
12–­15 days of culture on full strength MS medium sup-
plemented with IBA. The present protocol involved two-­
phases for establishment of hydroponics and aeroponics: 
1. root induction phase (2 months) and 2. growth phase 
(2–­3 months) followed by collection of exudates. Plant 
growth was comparable in both the culture systems but 
roots were found to be longer under aeroponic conditions. 
The amount of exudates collected also did not differ sig-
nificantly between the two culture systems and optimum 
time interval was 48 h.
Conclusion: We have optimized the stepwise protocol for 
developing hydroponics and aeroponics in P. nigra using 
cuttings and collection of root exudates. Our approach of 
growing P. nigra plants is environment-­friendly and non-­
destructive. The exudates released from roots are under 
analyses in collaboration with the GLYcoDiag company.
Keywords: aeroponics, bioactive compounds, controlled 
environment agriculture, hydroponics, in door farming, 
specialized metabolites, woody plant species
LUPIN BY-­PRODUCTS VALORIZATION FOR 
COSMETIC APPLICATIONS
A. Caramona1,*; J. Seixas2; A. Petronilho3; N. Maulide2; 
J. Marto1
1Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty 
of Pharmacy, Universidade de Lisboa, av. Prof. Gama 
pinto, Lisbon 1640–­003, Portugal; 2Spartax chemicals 
Lda, Odivelas, Portugal; 3NOVA Institute of Chemical and 
Biological Technology António Xavier (ITQB-­NOVA), av. 
Da República, Oeiras 2780–­157, Portugal
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 24 ===
24  |     
​ABS​TRACT
Objective: The cosmetic industry has been investing in 
upcycling to design value-­added products with health 
benefits [1]. Lupin by-­products (lupin wastewater, fibre-­
rich shells and lupin oil) offer potential health benefits, 
such as antioxidant, anti-­inflammatory and antimicrobial 
properties due to significant amounts of health-­promoting 
substances. Thus, this work focuses on studying the prop-
erties of lupin by-­products for developing sustainable and 
effective topical formulations to treat/prevent skin dis-
orders. A sustainable method is used to extract and pre-
serve the bioactive compounds using mixtures of natural 
deep eutectic solvents (NaDES) by the principles of green 
chemistry [2,3].
Methods: A computational program (COSMO-­RS soft-
ware) was used to screen a database of NaDES for the ex-
traction of bioactive compounds from lupin by-­products 
at 25°C and infinite dilution. Additionally, σ-­profiles were 
generated to analyse the polarity of each molecule in the 
NaDES mixtures to understand their affinity for bioactive 
compounds. The results are being experimentally vali-
dated, and ongoing studies include testing the extracts' 
antioxidant activity using DPPH assay.
Results: A database of 152 combinations of NaDES mix-
tures was estimated to extract bioactive compounds from 
lupin by-­products. Through the analysis of the solubility 
and activity coefficient of each NaDES mixture for each 
bioactive compound, it was found that the most suitable 
mixtures were betaine:glycerol (2:1) and lactic acid:betaine 
(4:1). The study of the polarity of each NaDES molecule by 
the σ-­profiles allowed to understand their affinity for the 
bioactive compounds. The results obtained by the compu-
tational program will be experimentally validated to as-
sess the accuracy of the COSMO-­RS and test the extracts' 
antioxidant activity.
Conclusion: Lupin by-­products are highlighted as a 
promising raw material for topical formulations, contrib-
uting to developing innovative systems for cosmetic ap-
plications. Extracting bioactive compounds using NaDES 
mixtures, predicted by a computational program, is a cost-­
effective and sustainable method that enhances the use of 
lupin by-­products in developing innovative and sustain-
able cosmetic products.
Keywords: cosmetics, lupin by-­products, NaDES, sus-
tainability, upcycling
References: [1] Reynolds C., Soma T., Spring C., Lazell J., 
Routledge handbook of waste, 2020, 413–­414.
[2] Zurob E., Cabezas R., Villarroel E., Rosas N., Merlet 
G., Quijada-­Maldonado E., Romero J., Plaza A.et al., 
Separation and Purification Technology, 2020, 248: 1–­11.
[3] Wojeicchowski J.P., Ferreira A.M., Abranches D.O., 
Mafra M.R, Coutinho J.A.P., ACS Sustainable Chemistry 
and Engineering, 2020, 8:12132–­12 141.
Knowledge of Human 
Biology for Better Cosmetics
SCREENING OF A MEDICAL PLANT LIBRARY 
USING A MICRORNA-­ON BIOLUMINESCENCE 
PLATEFORM IDENTIFIES SYLIMARIN AS 
POTENT ANTI-­POSRIASIS AGENT
E. Henriet1; Y. Laurent1; M. Simon2; P. Baril1,*
1Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS UPR4301 & 
Université d‘Orléans, Orléans, France; 2Toulouse Institute 
for Infectious and Inflammatory Diseases, Toulouse 
University III, France
OBJECTIVE: Medicinal plants have proven to be a valu-
able source of bioactive compounds for drug discovery 
in pharmacology and cosmetics. Surprisingly, only 8% of 
the plant kingdom has been explored so far meaning that 
there are still good opportunities to identify novel bioac-
tive structures. One of the current challenges in identify-
ing such compounds is the ease to screen complex medical 
libraries containing many plant extracts and/or purified 
biomolecules with speed, specificity and selectivity.
METHODS: Here we used our microRNA-­ON RILES re-
porter assay to identify these compounds and developed the 
first cell-­based microRNA screening platform in skin biol-
ogy and cosmetic. We placed the RILES system under the 
control of the TGF-­β1/microRNA-­21 signaling pathway in 
keratinocytes cells to mimic re-­epithelialization of human 
skin. We screened a home-­made medicinal plants library 
composed of 37 crude plant extracts and performed a com-
prehensive functional study to delineate roles of a plant ex-
tract in the biological behaviour of keratinocyte cells.
RESULTS: We identified silymarin, a plant extract iso-
lated from Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn., as modulator 
of miRNA-­21 expression through a non-­canonical TGF-­
β1 signalling pathway while RNA-­Seq analysis revealed 3 
unexpected transcriptomic signatures associated with ke-
ratinocyte differentiation, cell cycle and lipid metabolism. 
Mechanistically, we demonstrated that SM blocks cell 
cycle progression, inhibits keratinocyte differentiation 
through repression of Notch3 expression, stimulates lipid 
synthesis via activation of PPARγ signalling and inhibits 
inflammatory responses by suppressing the transcrip-
tional activity of NF-­κB. We finally showed that topical 
application of SM alleviates the development of IMQ-­
induced psoriasiform lesions in mice by abrogating the 
altered expression levels of markers involved in inflamma-
tion, proliferation, differentiation and lipid metabolism.
CONCLUSION: Our study uncovers novel biological 
roles of silymarinin skin haemostasis with possible 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 25 ===
|  25
ABSTR​ACT
applications in the management of psoriatic skin lesions 
and highlights the potential of our miRNA-­ON screening 
platform to identify novel bioactive compounds for 
cosmetic development.
Henriet et al., December 2022, Journal of Investigative 
Dermatology, Innovation. In press
h t t p s : / / w w w . j i d i n ​n o v a t ​i o n s . o r g / a r t i c ​l e /
S2667-0267(22)00083-2/fulltext
KEY 
WORDS: 
keratinocyte, 
screening, 
cellular 
biology,omics,mechanisms of action, microRNA.
FROM IN SILICO TO IN VIVO INVESTIGATION 
TO HYDRATE THE SKIN
L. Verzeaux1,*; R. Rao2; R. Vyumvuhore1; N. Belloy2; 
E. Aymard1; S. Baud2; M. Manfait3; M. Dauchez2; B. Closs1
1SILAB, Brive, France; 2Multi-­Scale modelling and 
imaging, MEDyC UMR CNRS 7369, University of 
Reims Champagne-­ Ardenne, Reims, France; 3BioSpecT 
(translational BioSpectroscopy), EA 7506, University of 
Reims Champagne-­Ardenne, Reims, France
OBJECTIVE. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
hygroscopic potential of apiogalacturonans (AGA), a sin-
gular and ancestral pectin, to propose a novel active ingre-
dient to meet the needs of dehydrated skin.
METHODS: The hygroscopic potential of AGA was in-
vestigated in silico by combining data available in the lit-
erature, and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The 
hygroscopic potential was predicted by analysing the fre-
quency of interaction of water molecules with each AGA 
residue. To investigate non-­invasively this hygroscopic-
ity, in vivo Raman microspectroscopy was conducted by 
using D20 on the arm of 8 volunteers. Finally, to deter-
mine and validate the cutaneous hydration level, in vivo 
measurements were conducted on Caucasian and Asian 
volunteers with a dehydrated skin by using a corneometer 
and a moisturemeter.
RESULTS: For the first time, molecular modelling inves-
tigations allowed us to characterize the 3D structure and 
dynamics of AGA. MD simulations revealed that these 
molecules have characteristic shell of waters in their sol-
vation process. Quantification of interactions identified 
the presence of 23 water molecules on average in contact 
with each residue of AGA. From a theoretical point of 
view, these building fragments have an interesting hy-
groscopic potential that seems twice as high as the one of 
hyaluronic acid [1]. The in vivo D20 tracking by Raman 
microspectroscopy revealed that after 3 hours of applica-
tion at the surface of the skin, AGA significantly capture 
and retain more water in the epidermis and deeper than a 
placebo control. 3 hours after a unique application, AGA 
significantly hydrate the stratum corneum (+17.8%) up to 
the superficial dermis (+11.9%) of Caucasian volunteers 
with dehydrated skin. These effects are increased 6 hours 
after the application and maintained after 21 and 42 days 
of application. This hydrating potential is also validated 
on Asian skin.
CONCLUSION: By combining molecular modeling and 
in vivo investigation, these results evidenced for the first 
time the high hygroscopic potential of AGA. Not only do 
these original natural molecules interact with water mol-
ecules, but they capture and retain them efficiently and 
durably in the skin. Hence, AGA are of great interest for 
the care of dehydrated skin.
1. P. Taweechat, R.B. Pandey, P. Sompornpisut, 
Carbohydrate research, 2020, 493:108026.
KEY WORDS: Apiogalacturonans, Molecular dynamics, 
Raman microspectroscopy, Hygroscopicity, Skin hydra-
tion, Dehydrated skin.
INNOVATIVE IN VITRO 3D SKIN MODEL FOR 
SAFETY ASSESSMENT: A CASE REPORT FOR 
THE SENSITIZATION
D. Fassini1; M. Simon2; H. Mejri1; C. Poinsot2; 
A. Homs Corbera1; E. Filaire2
1Cherry Biotech, 14 rue de la Beaune 93100 Montreuil; 
2Icare group, Biopôle Clermont-­Limagne, 6 rue Emile 
Duclaux, 63360 Saint-­Beauzire, France
OBJECTIVE: Before a new cosmetic ingredient is placed 
on the European market, evaluation of its safety profile, 
including the assessment of skin sensitization hazards 
and potency is mandatory. Currently, three technical test 
guidelines (OECD 442 C, D and E) include seven methods: 
Direct Peptide Reactivity Assay (DPRA), KeratinoSens™ 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 26 ===
26  |     
​ABS​TRACT
and LuSens, h-­CLAT, U-­SENS™, GARDskin and the IL-­8 
Luc assay. These methods should be considered in the 
context of a tiered testing strategy, a so-­called defined ap-
proach (DA), where a fixed data integration procedure is 
used to achieve a final classification based on the readout 
from several New Approach Methods (NAMs) [1]. Despite 
the significant advances of skin model equivalents, none 
of them, to our knowledge, recapitulate and consider the 
interplay between epidermis/dermis cells and the resident 
immune cells. Therefore, the aim of our study was to cre-
ate a new human full skin equivalent that includes an en-
dothelial barrier and some resident immune cells involved 
in the skin sensitization cascade.
METHODS: The model integrated human epidermal ke-
ratinocytes, normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF), 
Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial cells (HUVECS), 
and THP-­1 (a human monocytic cell line). Structure and 
cell-­specific markers were thoroughly characterized. To 
compare the developed model with the IL-­8 Luc assay, it 
was exposed to molecules with known in vivo and in vitro 
properties (sensitizing substances and negative controls, 
cf OECD 442) such as ethylene glycol dimethacrylate; 
phenylenediamine and formaldehyde.
RESULTS: Our approach resulted in a multilayered, 
differentiated epidermis proliferating on top of the der-
mis as revealed by histologic analyses. Presence of spe-
cific markers of human epidermis (Involucrin), dermis 
(CD26), endothelial (CD54) cells and resident mac-
rophages (M1: TNF-­alpha; M2: Dectin-­1) were evaluated 
by immunofluorescence.
CONCLUSION: We developed an immunocompetent, 
differentiated, and vascularized full-­skin in vitro model 
envisaging safety/sensitization assessments of cosmetic 
ingredients. The applications to the cosmetic industry are 
significant and bring hope of optimized evaluation of cos-
metic safety before their commercialization. Finally, our 
3D skin model should allow in future investigations on 
strategies and drugs to prevent skin inflammation.
KEY WORDS: Non-­animal-­testing methodologies, im-
munity, pseudo-­vascularization, skin sensitization, cos-
metic product safety.
REFERENCES
1. Barthe, M., Bavoux, C., Finot F., Mouche, I., Cuceu-­
Petrenci, C., Forreryd, A., Chérouvrier Hansson, A., 
Johansson, H., Lemkine, G.F., Thénot, J.P., Osman-­
Ponchet, H., Cosmetics, 2021, 8: 50.
PROCOLLAGEN EFFECT OF MICROALGAL 
EXOPO​LYS​ACC​HAR​IDES ON HUMAN DERMAL 
FIBROBLASTS: SOME STRUCTURAL AND 
MECHANISTIC ASPECTS
C. Toucheteau1; V. Deffains1; C. Gaignard2; I. Probert3; 
G. Pierre2; C. Laroche2; C. Rihouey4; L. Picton4; 
D. Le Cerf4; I. Arnaudin-­Fruitier1; P. Michaud2; 
N. Bridiau1,*; T. Maugard1
1LIENSs Laboratory (UMR CNRS 7266), Equipe BCBS, La 
Rochelle Université, France; 2Pascal Institute (UMR CNRS 
6602), Université Clermont Auvergne, France; 3Roscoff 
marine station, CNRS/Sorbonne Université, France; 4PBS 
Laboratory (UMR CNRS 6270), Université de Rouen-­
Normandie, France
OBJECTIVE: Exopolysaccharides (EPS) are produced 
and excreted by bacteria or microalgae. Unlike other mi-
croorganisms, studies on EPS from microalgae are scarce. 
The present work was part of the ANR POLYSALGUE 
project (figure 1), whose purpose was to increase the 
current knowledge regarding microalgae EPS and their 
valorisation. In this context, we aimed at investigating 
the dermo-­ cosmetic potential of 6 new EPS from micro-
algae [1].
METHODS: The first part of this work consisted in the 
development of a supported depolymerization method 
to reduce the molecular weight of these biopolymers. 
Depolymerized EPS were characterized, analysing their 
molecular weight by SEC-­MALS/RID/VD methods, and 
levels of sulfate groups and uronic acids were determined. 
The second part was the evaluation of the anti-­ aging po-
tential of these EPS. For this purpose, in vitro productions 
of collagen by human dermal fibroblasts from 20-­years 
and 46-­years old female donors were quantified.
RESULTS: A principal component analysis highlighted 
the correlation between the anti-­aging activity of EPS and 
their proportion of low molecular weight polysaccharides 
(< 10 kDa), while their uronic acid content was shown 
essential but only if EPS size was previously reduced. 
Enzymatic kinetic analyses of metalloproteases and hya-
luronidases were also conducted, indicating that the in-
hibition of metalloproteases seemed to be correlated with 
sulfate group content of EPS. Finally, an analysis of tran-
scripts showed that the increase in collagen production by 
fibroblasts could be due to the activation of the TGF-­β1 
signalling pathway and the inhibition of metalloprotease 
biosynthesis.
CONCLUSION: At least 3 of the 6 new isolated EPS were 
shown to be strong procollagen stimulants. Besides, the 
structure–­function relationship of their procollagen effect 
was investigated, providing better understanding of such 
biological activity.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 27 ===
|  27
ABSTR​ACT
KEY WORDS: Microalgal exopolysaccharide, depolym-
erization, solid acid-­catalysed hydrolysis, human der-
mal fibroblast, procollagen effect, structure–­function 
relationship.
FIGURE 1 Organization of the ANR POLYSALGUE 
project.
1. Gonçalves O., Pruvost J., Massé A., Decamp A., Probert 
I., Maugard T., Arnaudin I., Bridiau N., Toucheteau C., 
Le Cerf D., Picton L., Dulong V. Rihouey C., Gaignard 
C., Laroche C., Pierre G., Delattre C., Dubessay P. and 
Michaud P., Nouveaux exopolysaccharides dépolymérisés, 
issus de micro-­algues, leur procédé de préparation et leurs 
utilisations en cosmétique pour retarder les effets du vieil-
lissement cutané. Patent FR2102020, 2021.03.02.
EXADEX: A NOVEL ORGANOID MODEL OF 
HUMAN ADIPOSE TISSUE MIMICKING 
FIBROSIS AND INFLAMMATION
C. Dani1,2,*; V. Dani2; S. Bruni-­Favier1; 
B. Chignon-­Sicard2,3; A. Loubat1; A. Doglio2,4
1Faculté de Médecine, Université Côte d‘Azur, INSERM, 
CNRS, iBV, 06103 Nice, France; 2ExAdEx-­Innov, 28 
avenue de Valombrose, 06100 Nice, France; 3Polyclinique 
Saint-­George, 2 avenue de Rimiez, 06100 Nice, France; 
4Unité de Thérapie Cellulaire et Génique, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, 06101 Nice, France
OBJECTIVE: Through its lipid storage and destocking 
activities, adipose tissue (AT) constituting the hypoder-
mis represents the main energy reservoir of the human 
body. AT is also recognized as an endocrine organ able 
to produce adipokines that act positively on the capacity 
of dermal fibroblasts to synthesize matrix proteins, thus 
participating in the maintenance of skin integrity. For 
these reasons, AT is now considered as an innovative and 
unmissable biological target for cosmetic products. The 
development of physiological models integrating the com-
plexity of adipose tissue is thus necessary to improve the 
understanding of skin biological processes such as skin 
aging, cellulite, and physio-­pathological alterations.
METHODS: Starting from liposuction surgery waste 
subcutaneous fat, we developed a breakthrough pat-
ented technological process [1] called “ExAdEx” (Ex vivo 
Adipocyte Expansion) to establish an ex vivo study model 
retaining the viability, structure and functions of the na-
tive human adipose tissue. The innovativeness of the pro-
cess lies in the isolation and enrichment of endogenous 
proliferative adipose progenitor cells (APCs), combined 
with the use of nonenzymatically emulsified tissue units 
as a natural bioactive matrix.
RESULTS: We have shown in a recent paper [2] that 
ExAdEx process is able to preserve the 3D micro-­structure 
of the donor‘s native subcutaneous adipose tissue and 
to allow APC expansion in a microenvironment includ-
ing the extracellular matrix and endothelial cell network. 
The generated ex vivo models can be maintained at least 
8 weeks in culture conditions and display lipid droplet size 
comparable to the native tissue, in contrast with other 3D 
spheroid models. ExAdEx models are able to respond to 
physio-­pathological stimuli including beiging differen-
tiation, lipolysis and lipogenesis and mimicking typical 
pro-­inflammatory and pro-­fibrotic conditions of human 
adipose tissue. Use of anti-­inflammatory and anti-­fibrotic 
compounds is able to revert the altered phenotype, dem-
onstrating the relevance of ExAdEx models for ingredient 
testing and cosmetic claims.
CONCLUSION: Our micro-­physiological clinically rel-
evant explant models of human adipose tissue provide an 
original and unique approach for multiparametric screen-
ing and long-­term studies to assess the chronic effect of 
cosmetic products, characterize their biological effects on 
hypodermis and evaluate their efficacy for weight man-
agement, skin aging and skin health.
KEY WORDS: hypodermis, adipose tissue, ex vivo mod-
els, inflammation, fibrosis, skin health.
1. WO/2020/144381, Method for the in vitro or ex vivo am-
plification of human adipose tissue stem cells.
2. Dani, V.; Bruni-­Favier, S.; Chignon-­Sicard, B.; Loubat, 
A.; Doglio, A.; Dani, C. Regulation of Adipose Progenitor 
Cell Expansion in a Novel Micro-­Physiological Model 
of Human Adipose Tissue Mimicking Fibrotic and Pro-­
Inflammatory Microenvironments. Cells 2022, 11, 2798
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 28 ===
28  |     
​ABS​TRACT
REFLECTANCE CONFOCAL MICROSCOPY AS A 
SUPPORT FOR RESEARCH AND INNOVATION OF 
COSMETIC PRODUCTS
P. M. B. G. Maia Campos*
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, Brazil
OBJECTIVE: Reflectance Confocal Microscopy (RCM) 
is an advanced and innovative skin imaging technique to 
evaluate the morphological and structural characteristics 
of the skin in level close to histological, which allows the 
identify different skin types and cutaneous alterations as 
well as to evaluate the clinical efficacy of cosmetic prod-
ucts. In this context, the present study aimed to demon-
strate the importance of applying RCM for understanding 
the different skin types with respect to its hydrolipidic 
characteristics, pigmentation pattern and morphological 
and structural characteristics, as a support for the devel-
opment and evaluation of more specific and innovative 
cosmetic products.
METHODS: The morphological and structural character-
istics of the different skin types were evaluated in terms 
of thickness of the epidermal layers, keratinocytes organi-
zation at the viable epidermis, pigmentation pattern and 
morphology of papillae and papillary dermis by analysis 
of images obtained by means of the Reflectance Confocal 
Microscope (Vivascope 1500®, Lucid, Inc.).
RESULTS: The Imaging analysis showed differences in 
the skin morphological pattern depending on the hydroli-
pidic characteristics. Dry skin showed less homogeneity 
in the organization of keratinocytes and reduced thick-
ness at the granular layer when compared to normal skin. 
The oily skin showed alterations in the morphology of se-
baceous glands [1]. In addition, it was possible to observe 
alterations in the morphological pattern of the papillary 
dermis, according to the different types of hyperpigmenta-
tion [2–­3]. Finally, changes in the morphological pattern 
of the dermo-­epidermal junction and papillary dermis, 
such as flattening of the dermal papillae and collagen 
morphology were found, mainly in photoaged skin [2–­3].
CONCLUSION: It was possible to highlight the different 
applications and possibilities of using RCM for characteri-
zation of different skin types in order to support Research 
and Innovation of cosmetics that meet the consumer de-
mand for more specific products and are scientifically 
proven under real conditions of use. In summary, this 
study contributes to advance the scientific knowledge re-
garding the characterization of different skin types by clin-
ical studies with instrumental measurements, as a support 
for the strategic development of innovative cosmetics that 
meet the needs of different skin types and monitor the im-
provement of skin during cosmetic treatments.
KEY WORDS: Clinical studies, imaging techniques, skin 
types, skin photoaging, skin characterization
1. Maia Campos P.M.B.G., Melo M.O., Mercúrio D.G. 
Front Physiol, 2019, 10: 1–­9.
2. Mercurio D.G., Jdid R., Morizot F., Masson P., Maia 
Campos P.M.B.G. Br J Dermatol, 2016, 174: 553–­561.
3. Shirata M.M.F., Alves G.A.D., Maia Campos P.M.B.G. 
Int J Cosmet Sci, 2019, 41: 265–­73.
HIGH-­PLEX SPATIAL IMAGING TO DECIPHER 
SKIN MICRO​ENV​IRO​NMENT COMPLEXITY
B. Buttard*; A. Meghraoui-­Kheddar; J. Hocquet
AMKbiotech, 2400 routes des Colles, Sophia-­Antipolis 
06410, France
Objective: Unravelling tissue contexture is emerging as a 
key step to understand mechanisms of tissue homeostasis 
and its imbalance in order to develop adapted preventive 
and more effective products. Addressing the skin as a het-
erogeneous complex system allows the analysis of its cel-
lular and acellular component phenotypes, functions and 
interactions and obtain a complete snapshot of the skin at 
each investigated state.
Methods: Imaging Mass Cytometry (IMC) is a High-­Plex 
single-­cell spatial imaging system which allows the simul-
taneous visualization and quantitative analysis of up to 40 
markers and 200 targets in 1 skin section after a unique 
staining step and image acquisition. Combined to a tai-
lored computational image analysis based on machine 
learning algorithms, this approach allows a quantitative 
evaluation of skin components' variations and treatments' 
effects (Figure-­1).
Results: We developed innovative IMC panels allow-
ing the analysis of key structural skin components, main 
dermis and epidermis resident cells and several infiltrat-
ing immune cells, at once (Figure 1). These panels allow 
the characterization of both frozen and formalin-­fixed 
paraffin-­embedded (FFPE) human skin sections. The 
computational analysis of the obtained high-­plex images 
gives access to skin inflammation mechanisms, skin struc-
ture integrity and breakdown and skin regeneration from 
one image (Figure 1).
Conclusion: Such a comprehensive and integrative analy-
sis drives to a global scheme that depict skin balance break-
down and allows deeper investigation of products' effects.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 29 ===
|  29
ABSTR​ACT
Keywords: high-­plex spatial biology, imaging, imaging 
technologies, measurement of biological activity, new 
generation tissue, new technologies to investigate support, 
OMICs
PROTECTIVE EFFECT OF TRANS-­Ε-­
VINIFERIN AGAINST BLUE LIGHT-­INDUCED 
PIGMENTATION
S. Hassanaly1,*; E. Bony1; J.-­C. Choulot1; M. Thomas2
1Caudalie, Gidy, France; 2Caudalie, Paris, France
Objective: Blue light is part of the visible light spectrum 
and ranges from 400 to 500 nm. It is emitted by the sun, 
but also by artificial sources of light. Several studies have 
demonstrated the harmful effects of blue light on skin. 
Particularly, blue light has been shown to induce a last-
ing hyperpigmentation, more pronounced than the one 
caused by UV. Trans-­ε-­Viniferin is a natural polyphenolic 
compound produced by plants in response to injury or 
pathogen attack. One of the most common sources is vine. 
Trans-­ε-­Viniferin has previously demonstrated its ben-
eficial effect on UV-­induced pigmentation. We conducted 
this research to determine if trans-­ε-­Viniferin could in-
hibit blue light-­induced pigmentation and to understand 
the mechanism behind this effect.
Methods: We assessed the effect of trans-­ε-­Viniferin, ei-
ther purified or as a raw extract from vine shoot, on mela-
nin production induced by blue light irradiation (at 412 
and 450 nm) in human epidermal melanocytes. Opsin 
expression is currently analysed in human epidermal 
melanocytes. The effect of a stabilized trans-­ε-­Viniferin 
extract from vine shoot on melanin production was also 
studied on human skin explants.
Results: Trans-­ε-­Viniferin inhibited melanin production 
induced by blue light irradiation in human melanocytes 
(Figure 1). Both Raw Viniferin extract and purified 
trans-­ε-­Viniferin reduced melanin content in irradiated 
melanocytes.
In another experiment, the stabilized Viniferin extract was 
shown to significantly reduce blue light-­induced melanin 
production in human skin explants, at both wavelengths.
Conclusion: Trans-­ε-­Viniferin possesses a significant in-
hibiting effect on melanin synthesis induced by blue light 
and can be used in its stabilized form in formula to fight 
against blue-­light induced hyperpigmentation.
Keywords: blue light, pigmentation, trans-­ε-­Viniferin
Reference: [1] Regazzetti, C., Sormani, L., Debayle, D., 
Bernerd, F., Tulic, M. K., De Donatis, G. M., Chignon-­
Sicard, B., Rocchi, S., and Passeron, T., The Journal of in-
vestigative dermatology, 2018, 138(1), 171–­178.
PROTEIN EXTINCTION BY PROTACS TO 
EVALUATE THE SAFETY OF COSMETIC 
COMPOUNDS
A. Serrano1; J. Ribes2; P. Daligaux3; C. Chesné3; K. Plé2; 
S. Routier2; B. Vallée1; H. Bénédetti1,*
1Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS 4301, Orléans, 
France; 2Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique, 
Université d'Orléans, CNRS 7311, Orléans, France; 
3Starlight 111 Boulevard Duhamel de Monceau, Olivet, 
France
Currently, cosmetic safety is a very important concern for 
consumers and is highly regulated. The cosmetic industry 
is using more and more active molecules to improve prod-
uct efficiency, but these molecules must be first evaluated 
for their potential effects on the human body. Modern tox-
icology is based on the Adverse Outcome Pathway para-
digm, meaning deciphering the mechanisms of action of 
these molecules is crucial. In this context, we would like 
to develop an “easy to handle” tool that will allow us to 
evaluate ingredient safety.
Figure 1 High-­plex image analysis steps.
FIGURE 1 Effect of raw Viniferin extract and purified 
Viniferin on melanin amount after blue light irradiation. 
Statistical test of Mann–­Whitney: # vs non irradiated un-
treated, * vs. untreated 412 nm, + vs. untreated 450 nm.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 30 ===
30  |     
​ABS​TRACT
To reach this goal, we have developed molecules called 
PROTACs (Proteolysis Targeting Chimera). These mol-
ecules lead to the chemical knock down of a selective tar-
get via its degradation by the proteasome. In the assay, we 
are comparing the impact of the cosmetic compound via 
our target in the knock down system and in the wild type 
system. We chose 2 targets, the oestrogen receptor (ER) 
involved in endocrine disruption and an enzyme of the 
skin involved in reactive metabolite formation in order to 
follow endocrine and metabolic responses.
PROTACs are synthetized by our collaborators (ICOA), 
and we will assess their biological activity. The first step is 
to (i) confirm, their capacity to turn off our target protein, 
(ii) to check their specificity for the target protein and (iii) 
to control their cytotoxicity. The second step is to make 
the proof of concept of our system with molecules known 
to affect endocrine machinery or metabolism, and finally 
to test the PROTACs on more specialized cells such as 
human primary skin cells.
Currently, we have validated our system to evaluate the 
capacity and specificity of PROTACs to induced degrada-
tion of our targets. Two PROTACs targeting ER have been 
synthetized and have shown a capacity to induce its deg-
radation. Their specificity towards the target is still being 
studied. Two PROTACs targeting the skin enzyme have 
been synthetized and will be evaluated soon.
Our first results for the ER PROTACs are very promising 
on model cell lines. They need to be confirmed on skin 
cells in order to validate our device for future use by cos-
metic industry.
Keywords: allergy and metabolism in skin, oestrogen re-
ceptor, PROTACs, safety of cosmetic products
The authors would like to thank the Région Centre Val 
de Loire and Cosmetosciences Program for their financial 
support and Cosmetic Valley for their certification of this 
research program.
IMPACT OF OXYGEN LEVEL ON EPIDERMAL 
CELL ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITY
N. Chettouh-­Hammas*; G. Busco; F. Fasani; C. Grillon
Center for Molecular Biophysics, CNRS UPR 4301, rue 
Charles Sadron, Orléans Cedex 2 45 071, France
At the interface between the interior and the exterior of 
the body, our skin displays a complex microenvironment 
with temperature and pH gradients. Less known, the oxy-
gen level also occurs in a gradient form. In fact, the physi-
ological level of oxygen in the skin ranges from 1.5% to 
7%, what we called physioxia. However, in vitro cutane-
ous models are usually performed at atmospheric oxygen 
levels, normoxia (~18.6% O2 in incubators). So skin cells 
are in a hyperoxic environment compared to their physi-
ological conditions. While oxygen is the major source of 
cellular energy, it is also known to be the precursor of re-
active oxygen species (ROS). The present study focused on 
the effect of oxygen levels on the redox state and antioxi-
dant defences of keratinocytes.
This study was carried out using 2D models, HaCaT cell 
line and human primary keratinocytes, and new 3D mod-
els of epidermis developed in physioxia as compared to the 
same models developed in normoxia. ROS measurement 
was determined using fluorescent probes and the effec-
tiveness of antioxidant enzymes (superoxide dismutases 
(SODs), catalase and glutathione peroxidases (GPXs)) was 
characterized at various levels: gene and protein expres-
sions, by qPCR, western blot and immunostaining, as well 
as enzymatic activity.
Our results demonstrated a better resistance of keratino-
cyte monolayer cultures in physioxia against oxida-
tive stress that can be explained by a higher antioxidant 
enzymatic activity observed for catalase and SODs. 
These results were further confirmed in a more physi-
ological model, the reconstructed epidermis in physioxia. 
Advanced protein analysis identified a distinct mecha-
nism: an overactivation of catalase and an overproduction 
of SOD2. In addition, a novel subcellular localisation of 
SOD1 into the nuclei was found in physioxia, suggest-
ing an additional role of this enzyme in the antioxidant 
response.
Our study links for the first time the oxygen level with 
the redox state in the skin. These findings illustrate the 
importance of respecting the physiological oxygen level 
of the skin to better understand the regulation of antioxi-
dant defences in keratinocytes but also to be close to the 
skin physiology in the evaluation of cosmetic ingredient 
activity.
Keywords: antioxidant, epidermis, keratinocytes, nor-
moxia, oxidatif stress, physioxia
MICROBIOTA CO-­CULTURE MODELS FOR 
COSMETICS INGREDIENTS EVALUATION: 
METABOLISM AND SKIN ADHESION STUDIES
B. Roubinet*; M. Senicar; L. Landemarre
GLYcoDiag, 2 rue du Cristal, Orleans 45 100, France
Skin microbiota constitutes the first biological barrier in 
association with innate immunity. The cutaneous micro-
biota is composed of various populations of microorgan-
isms that are distributed in well-­defined balance which 
depends on the different environments and localizations 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 31 ===
|  31
ABSTR​ACT
on the skin [1,2]. From our point of view, the effects of 
cosmetics ingredient on microbiota could be studied by 
two complementary approaches: analysis of microbiote 
metabolism effect (growth or decrease of microorganism) 
and modulation of the microbiote-­skin adhesion. Our co-­
culture models are built with microorganisms obtained 
from collections or skin wild type strains (collected on 
skin donors) and cultivated in an environment that mim-
ics the skin (pH, temperature, selection/proportions of mi-
croorganism according to their localization on the skin). 
Indeed, up to four to five different calibrated strains could 
be mixed together in proportion mimicking eubiosis equi-
librium or dysbiosis related to specific cutaneous diseases 
in a common culture medium based on minimum nutri-
ents, that allows to keep the growth of each strain in de-
sired proportions during the study. Also, these models are 
devoted to the understanding of the product metabolism 
on skin microorganism to know precisely if the ingredient 
has prebiotic, bacteriostatic or bactericidal properties.
On the other hand, there is no cutaneous microbiome 
without cutaneous cells. Hence, the symbiosis of micro-­
organisms with skin cells (mainly corneocytes and 
keratinocytes) is the key forensuring functionality of bio-
logical skin barrier preventing pathogen colonization, mi-
crobiota equilibrium, appropriate immune response and 
a healthy skin. The symbiosis depends on number of in-
teractions/ communications between cells among which 
glycobiological interactions play the main role, notably 
in micro-­organisms adhesion, biofilm formation, com-
munication with skin cells and innate immunity. Taking 
into account these important considerations, we managed 
to further develop a model that is intended to study the 
microbiota-­corneocytes 
(or 
microbiota-­keratinocytes) 
adhesion. This in vitro model is useful for screening new 
actives and/or to confirm the effect of products (actives 
or final products) on microbiota-­skin adhesion. The ad-
hesion study can be performed by simultaneously moni-
toring the adhesion of up to 4 different strains, giving a 
complementary and totally adapted adhesion model to 
our co-­culture models (proportions, identity and number 
of species can be modulated according to the targeted skin 
environment).
Keywords: metabolism effect, microbiota, skin adhesions
References: [1] Kong, H., H., Segre, J. A., J.Invest.
Dermatol. 2012, 132, 933–­939.
[2] Eisenstein, M., Nature, 2020, 588, S209-­S211.
DESIGN AND SYNTHESIS OF OESTROGEN 
RECEPTOR PROTACS TO EVALUATE 
POTENTIAL COSMETIC TOXICITY
J. Ribes1; A. Serrano2; B. Vallée2; H. Bénédetti2; 
P. Daligaux3; C. Chesné3; K. Plé1; S. Routier1,*
1Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique, Université 
d'Orléans, CNRS 7311, Orléans, France; 2Centre de 
Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS4301, Orléans, France; 
3Starlight,111 Boulevard Duhamelde Monceau, Olivet, 
France
PROTACs are molecules able to induce the knock down 
of a protein of interest (POI). They are composed of three 
building blocks: (i) the ligand of the POI, (ii) a linker, (iii) 
a ligand of the ligase E3. When the PROTAC binds to its 
POI, the corresponding E3 ligase is recruited leading to 
the POI ubiquitination and consequent degradation by 
the proteasome.
The originality of this project lies in the use of PROTACs 
in toxicology for the cosmetic industry rather than in 
therapeutic fields (oncology, neurodegenerative or viral 
diseases)0 [1]. Accordingly, our group is interested in the 
conception and the synthesis of PROTACs which target 
the oestrogen receptor (ER) to evaluate potential endo-
crine disrupter activity of a cosmetic compound. The cos-
metic compound will be incubated with wild-­type cells 
and in parallel with cells treated with the PROTAC tar-
geting ER, leading to ER knock down. The evolution of 
the cosmetic compound will be analysed and compared 
between the two conditions allowing to assess if the com-
pound is metabolized by ER, and then constitute an en-
docrine disrupter. Thus, these PROTACs are used as in 
vitro predictive tools in order to highlight the toxicity of 
the tested agents.
On one hand, our work started the synthesis of original 
PROTACs from estradiol derivatives to identify (1) the im-
portance of the linker's position on the steroid, (2) which 
E3 ligase is the most efficient, (3) the biological activity 
in comparison with ER PROTACs already described in 
the literature. On the other hand, biological test consists 
to find the best conditions (time and concentrations) to 
evaluate specific ER extinction upon PROTAC treatment.
One original PROTAC from ethinylestradiol (linker intro-
duced on C17) and a reference PROTAC from raloxifene 
have been synthesized and tested in vitro. Currently the 
synthesis of two other original PROTACs from ethinyle-
stradiol (linker introduced on C17) and estrone (linker in-
troduced on C16) is in progress. Preliminary assays on the 
first two PROTACs are quite promising with significant 
reduction of ER amount in two dedicated cell lines.
Keywords: cosmetic predictive tools, estrogen receptor, 
PROTAC
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 32 ===
32  |     
​ABS​TRACT
The authors would like to thank CosmétoSciences and the 
region Centre Val de Loire for their financial support.
Reference: [1] C. Nieto-­Jiménez, E. Cabañas Morafraile, 
C. Alonso-­Moreno and A. Ocaña, Molecular Cancer 2022, 
21:67
IN SILICO APPROACHES FOR PREDICTION 
OF ENDOCRINE DISRUPTING POTENTIAL OF 
COSMETIC COMPOUNDS
A. Sharma1,*; A. Dey2; R. Li1; N. Larzat1; J. B. Idoipe1
1Insight Biosolutions, Biopole Rennes, Rennes 35 000, 
France; 2Moldoc Biotech Private Limited, Yamuna Vihar, 
Dehli 110 053, India
Endocrine disruptorchemicals (EDCs) are exogenous sub-
stances or mixture of substances that alter functions of 
the endocrine system and consequently cause hormone 
dysfunction leading to adverse effects suchas infertility, 
impaired fetal development, obesityand cancers. EDCs 
are not only present in environment (air, soil, water), food 
sources, but also numerous EDCs families (phthalates, 
bisphenols, parabens, benzophenones) are presentin cos-
metics. Actually, cosmetic industries are faced with the 
challenge forthe safety evaluating suspected endocrine 
disrupting properties of cosmetic ingredients. In this con-
text, European cosmetic regulation, OECD, developed 
a revised guidance document 150 on standardized test 
guidelines for evaluating of EDCs in 2018 [1].
This case study aimed to evaluate the endocrine disrupt-
ing potential of two cosmetic ingredients by using in silico 
approaches. Molecular docking method was used to deter-
minate the interaction between the target protein and the 
test compounds. Oestrogen alpha (ESRα) and Oestrogen 
Beta (ESRβ) receptors were docked against natural li-
gand Estradiol and non-­natural chemical compounds as 
Bisphenol A, Bisphenol B. The in silico QSAR was further 
used for predicting toxicity of test compounds.
Molecular docking analysis revealed that both natural li-
gand and test compounds had a strong binding affinities 
with both ESRα and ESRβ. Estradiol producedstrong bind-
ing affinities with docking energy of −7.7 kcal/mol against 
ESRα and −8.8 kcal/mol against ESRβ. Thechemical 
compounds had comparable binding affinities such as 
Bisphenol A with docking energy of −8.1 kcal/mol against 
ESRα and −7.9 kcal/mol against ESRβ, Bisphenol B 
with docking energy of −8.2 kcal/mol against ESRα and 
−8.2 kcal/mol against ESRβ. Our docking data showthat 
chemical compounds like natural hormone interact with 
the ESR α and ESR β receptors and could interfere with 
the normal functioning of hormones. Moreover, the 
QSAR study also suggested that the chemical compounds 
were toxic in nature.
Therefore, the present investigation demonstrates mo-
lecular docking simulation combined with in silico QSAR 
approach allow to a rapid and accurate screening of endo-
crine disrupting potential of cosmetic compounds.
Keywords: cosmetics, endocrine disrupting chemicals, 
estrogen receptors, in silico, molecular docking, QSAR
Reference: [1] OECD (2018), Revised Guidance 
Document 150 on Standardized Test Guidelines for 
Evaluating Chemicals for Endocrine Disruption, OECD 
Series on Testing and Assessment, OECD Publishing, 
Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/97892​64304​741-en.
DEVELOPMENT OF BIO-­ACTIVE FLUORESCENT 
PROBES TARGETING THE RHO-­KINASE ROCK: 
NEW TOOLS FOR THE SCREENING OF ACTIVE 
INGREDIENTS
S. Hammoud1; J. Corret2; B. Vallée2; H. Bénédetti2; 
P. Daligaux3; C. Chesné3; K. Plé1; S. Routier1,*
1Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique, Université 
d'Orléans, CNRS 7311, Orléans, France; 2Centre de 
biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS 4301, Orléans, France; 
3Starlight, 111 boulevard Duhamel de Monceau, Olivet, 
France
Having bags or puffiness under the eyes, although not a se-
rious medical condition, is common with age as the tissues 
around eyes weaken, due to fatigue and lifestyle choices. 
They are essentially formed by an excess of liquids that the 
circulation of the lymph in the lymphatic vessels of the eye 
contour (interstitial liquid), has failed to evacuate due to a 
deficiency. Unlike the arterial and venous network, lymph 
circulation results from contraction of the muscle cells of the 
lymphatic system. The inclusion of active ingredients which 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 33 ===
|  33
ABSTR​ACT
stimulate lymphatic circulation in cosmetics could allow a 
faster and more consistent deflation of these bags and thus 
improve the effectiveness of current methods, mainly based 
on the application of cold compresses and micro-­massages.
The Rho-­associated protein kinase (ROCK) is one of the 
major players in endothelial and lymphatic muscle cell 
contraction regulation as it controls tone and contractility 
of lymphatic vessels and the integrity of their intercellular 
barriers. We have designed fluorescent probes to visualize 
the activity of this kinase.
We have tested our probes on HeLa model cell line as well 
as on a more specialized HepaRG cell line, a unique and 
well-­established hepatic cell system capable of producing 
early hepatic progenitor cells as well as fully mature 
human hepatocytes. Our probes enter the cell and is active 
as it affects cell cytoskeleton dynamics.
Probe
Probe + Hoechst
Actine (Phalloidine)
Superposition
Our fluorescent probes are new tools that can be used to 
easily monitor the effect of cosmetic actives on the ROCK 
protein and therefore on lymphatic tone. Because of the 
fluorescence reading mode, an application in cosmetic ac-
tive ingredient screening could be developed and easily 
monitored.
The authors would like to thank the Région Centre Val 
de Loire and Cosmetosciences Program for their financial 
support and Cosmetic Valley for their certification of this 
research projest.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 34 ===
34  |     
​ABS​TRACT
FLUORESCENT PROBES FOR THE STUDY OF 
THE EPITHELIAL CELL CYTOSQUELETON AND 
THE SAFETY OF COSMETIC INGREDIENTS
M. Gay1; A. ben Jamaa1; F. Bree3; C. Guguen-­Guillouzo3; 
P. Daligaux3,*, C. Chesné3; K. Plé1; S. Routier1,*
1Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique, Université 
d'Orléans, CNRS 7311, Orléans, France; 3Starlight, 111 
boulevard Duhamel de Monceau, Olivet, France
The cosmetic industry is facing new challenges to select 
and use ingredients with confidence. To ensure consumer 
safety this means being able to evaluate both their effec-
tiveness and reliability. Our project combines chemistry 
and cell biology to design and validate fluorescent probes 
to evaluate the toxicity of cosmetic ingredients, alone or 
incorporated in a formulation.
The goal of our project is to transpose a validated process 
developed in experimental pharmacology to the specific 
problems of the cosmetic industry. We have designed 
probes to target specific cell signalling pathways whose 
respective roles are to activate or deactivate cytoskeletal 
movement affecting cell plasticity. This was done in order 
to visualize their function in the presence of external 
chemical agents including formulation components.
We have used the HepaRG™ cell line as a representative 
model of the shape and contraction of bile canaliculi in 
hepatocytes. This is an excellent model of epithelial cells, 
including skin keratinocytes. The cells were treated with 
various molecules known to induce cholestasis, a pathol-
ogy which modifies the hepatocyte cytoskeleton, such as 
Chlorpromazine (CPZ), Fasudil (FAS) and Cyclosporine 
A (CSA).
2D-­differentiated HepaRG cells (HPR116 from Biopredic) 
were incubated with 5 μM FluobileTM probe at 37°C for 
30 min. After washing, cells were incubated with refer-
ence cholestatic compounds (CPZ, chlorpromazine; CSA, 
cyclosporine A; FAS, fasudil; TRO, troglitazone).
Our Fluobile™ probes accumulate in bile canaliculi and 
thus allow the visualization of bile acid transport. The 
rapid detection of cellular bile accumulation and the easy 
evaluation of the constriction/dilation state of the bile 
canaliculi allow them to be used to predict the poten-
tial toxicity of chemical compounds including cosmetic 
ingredients.
The authors would like to thank the Région Centre Val 
de Loire and Cosmetosciences Program for their financial 
support and Cosmetic Valley for their certification of this 
research project.
Reference: [1] Vinken, M.; Pauwels, M.; Ates, G.; 
Vivier, M.; Vanhaecke, T.; Rogiers, V. Screening of 
Repeated Dose Toxicity Data Present in SCC(NF)P/
SCCS Safety Evaluations of Cosmetic Ingredients. Arch. 
Toxicol. 2012, 86 (3), 405–­412. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00204-011-0769-z.
EXPLORING THE FUTURE OF MAKEUP: 
A MICROFLUIDIC IN VITRO SKIN MODEL TO 
ASSESS GALENIC FORMS' EFFICACY VIA SEBUM 
OR SWEAT EXCRETION
A. Paillette1,*; D. Freitas1; P. Barlier2; F. Monti1
1Microfactory SAS, Paris, France; 2Cos & Co SAS, 
Versailles, France
Objective: The aim of this work is to present an innova-
tive in vitro assessment method of cosmetics' efficacy. It 
purposes to show evidence that a new microfluidic skin 
model is a faster technology for evaluation of different ga-
lenic forms of cosmetics regarding their resistance to the 
excretion of sebum or sweat.
Methods: A microfluidic solution named U-­Skin™ was 
used to compare the performance of powder foundation 
and eyeshadow. It mimicked in vitro sebum or sweat ex-
cretions under controlled flow injection. Standardized 
quantity of cosmetics from the market were applied on 
chips. The resistance to each excreted fluid was obtained 
for each product. The colour and brightness variation 
were obtained through image analyses.
Results: It highlights that both products tested were 
impacted differently by sebum and sweat. The difference 
of brightness and colour variation of powder foundation 
was more noticeable when compared with the eyeshadow. 
Observing the curves presented in Figure 1, it is evident 
FIGURE 1 (a) U-­Skin™ instrument/chip; (b) Eyeshadow 
gloss resistance through sebum or sweat excretions.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 35 ===
|  35
ABSTR​ACT
that the eyeshadow resists longer to sweat excretion 
than sebum excretion. For the powder foundation, the 
resistance to sebum or sweat excretions are equivalent in 
time.
Conclusion: U-­Skin™ was able to discriminate the behav-
iour of both types of cosmetics regarding the colour and 
brightness variation. Each parameter was discriminant 
for each fluid excreted (sebum or sweat). It allows the fu-
ture correlation with mattifying or long-­lasting claims in 
the market for several galenic forms, such as this innova-
tive application with powder make-­up. Furthermore, this 
method is faster and more economical than in vivo studies. 
Moreover, this method could be used as a screening tool 
before in vivo studies. Additionally, it provides new in-
formation on both sebum or sweat excretions separately, 
which are unavailable at in vivo testing. After proving pre-
viously, the efficiency of several foundations in emulsified 
forms with sebum excretion, we presented here a new ap-
plication of U-­Skin™ for powders through sebum or sweat 
excretion.
Keywords: efficacy, in vitro, microfluidics, sweat, sebum
HOW MICROFLUIDIC TECHNOLOGY IS A NEW 
WAY TO SUPPORT ANTIPERSPIRANT CLAIM 
SUBSTANTIATION
F. Monti1,*; D. Freitas1; P. Barlier2
1Microfactory SAS, Paris, France; 2Cos & Co SAS, 
Versailles, France
Objective: This work presents an innovative in vitro as-
sessment method of antiperspirants' efficacy. It purposes 
to show evidence that the burst pressure of clots in mi-
crofluidic synthetic pores is a good parameter for this 
evaluation.
Methods: A microfluidic solution composed of a chip and 
its instrument (Smart Pore™) was used to evaluate anti-
perspirants' performances. It mimics in vitro sweat excre-
tion under controlled flow injection. Standardized amount 
of 4 roll-­on from the market were applied on chips. A pres-
sure was imposed after 1 h of contact between the sweat 
and the products. The maximum pressure to unclog the 
pores was obtained for each product and its correlation 
with the claimed efficacy was evaluated. Clot formation 
time was characterized by image processing.
Results: The results showed that the highest burst pressure 
was obtained with the 96 h-­claimed antiperspirant, which 
was 928 ± 55 mbars and statistically superior to the 24 h-­
claimed antiperspirant (447 ± 20 mbars). The average 
burst pressure is 693 ± 96 mbars and 731 ± 62 mbars for 
48 and 72 h-­claimed antiperspirants, respectively. Both 
antiperspirants showed statistically equivalent results 
concerning to clot pressure resistance. In addition, the 
quantitative analysis of the videos provided by Smart-­
Pore™ regarding clot formation time shows different 
behaviours for each product tested (Figure 1).
Conclusion: An innovative in vitro method for the evalua-
tion of antiperspirants' efficiency was presented as a novel 
alternative method to predict their claim substantiation.
The measurement of clot pressure resistance (burst pres-
sure) in a microfluidic pore mimicking human sweating 
was observed as an appropriate parameter for the in vitro 
classification and discrimination of antiperspirants. By 
testing 4 samples we were able to predict which samples 
displayed antiperspirant properties compatible with their 
commercial claims.
Furthermore, this method is faster and more economical 
than in vivo studies. In addition, the pores are optically 
transparent at Smart Pore™, providing videos contain-
ing new insights on the phenomena happening between 
sweat and antiperspirants. These observations, such as, 
kinetics of clot formation and depth of product penetra-
tion, are not available with in vivo testing. This method 
could be used as a screening tool before in vivo studies.
Keywords: antiperspirant, efficacy, in vitro, microfluid-
ics, pore, sweat
EFFICACY STUDY OF CREAM FOR SENSITIVE 
SKIN WITH TRIPLE-­ACTION NATURAL 
MOISTURIZER AGENT FOR SKIN HYDRATION 
AND SKIN SENSITIVITY IMPROVEMENT
N. Istiqomah*; S. Jamal; A. M. Christianti
Paragon Technology and Innovation, Tangerang, 
Indonesia
Objective: Stinging, burning, itchy, and redness are the 
common symptoms of sensitive skin.
One of the causes is weakening of skin barrier function 
because of poor skin moisture. Many people declare their 
skin is sensitive, and have preference in choosing natural 
product. Therefore, a cream formulation containing a 
FIGURE 1 From the left to right: Smart-­Pore™, micro-
fluidic chip, different shapes of clots, results obtained re-
garding burst pressure and clot formation time for the 4 
antiperspirants tested.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 36 ===
36  |     
​ABS​TRACT
combination of humectant, emollient, and occlusive agent, 
which are natural derived, was prepared as strategy for 
restoring skin barrier and moisture into normal condition. 
The study was aimed to evaluate the effect of the product 
on moisturizing properties, skin barrier integrity, and 
irritation potency using instruments and self-­assessment 
questionnaires.
Methods: A multi-­centre, double-­blind study consists of 
four trials:
1. Once-­daily use test in 35 females to examine deep 
and long-­lasting moisturizing and skin barrier using 
Corneometer and Tewameter by tape stripping on 
14 days application.
2. One-­application use test in 30 females to assess ery-
thema index to represent irritation potential by capsai-
cin inducing with Mexameter.
3. Twice-­daily use test in 20 females to evaluate moisturiz-
ing and smoothness using Corneometer and Visioscan 
on 14 days application.
4. One-­application use test in 20 females to study self per-
ception of irritation potential by lactic acid.
Results: Cream formulation containing humectant (glyc-
erin, saccharide isomerate, and hyaluronic acid), emollient 
(squalane), and occlusive (shea butter) shows significant 
improvement in skin moisturizing and skin barrier with 
long-­lasting hydration up to 72 hours and up to 10 layers 
depth of epidermis. It also helps to improve smoothness 
as shown in the SEsm index. In a single application after 
10 minutes, it showed a reduced erythema index by capsai-
cin inducing and irritation sign with lactic acid inducing.
Conclusion: The study showed that a product with triple 
action natural moisturizer can increase skin moisture and 
improve skin barrier integrity. Subjects with improved 
skin moisture have exhibited reduction in skin sensitivity 
from Lactic Acid and Capsaicin induction.
Keywords: long lasting hydration, natural moisturizer, 
sensitive skin, stinging test
PREBIOTIC SHORT CHAIN FRUCTO-­OLIGO​
SAC​CHA​RIDES PROMOTE SKIN MICROBIOTA 
BALANCE
C. Le Bourgot1,*; E. Gaio2; V. Murat1; M. Micheletto2; 
E. Tedesco2; F. Benetti2
1Tereos, Scientific & Regulatory Affairs Department, 
France; 2ECSIN-­ECAMRICERT SRL Laboratory, Italy
Objective: The skin microbiota is an essential player for 
the maintenance of a healthy skin. It guarantees protection 
and biological barrier by competing with pathogens and 
by closely communicating with the immune system. The 
development of active ingredients preserving or restoring 
the skin microbiota represents an ovel target for skincare 
applications. Prebiotics are of interest in cosmetics as they 
could be applied to balance almost any microbial commu-
nity to achieve beneficial effects. However, little is known 
about their effectiveness as skin microbiota modulators. 
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of short 
chain fructo-­oligosaccharides (scFOS) on some represent-
ative bacterial strains of the skin microbiota.
Methods: We selected three bacterial strains representative 
of the human skin microbiota. We measured the growth 
and competitive activity of these specific bacteria for the 
use, as energy source, of scFOS from sugar beet (DP 3–­5; 
FOSbeauty®, Beghin-­Meiji), in minimal medium and in a 
reconstructed human epithelium (RHE) in vitro model.
Results: ScFOS promoted and sustained the growth 
of the selected beneficial skin commensal bacterium, 
Staphylococcus epidermidis, up to 24 h in minimal me-
dium. The growth of strains regarded as opportunistic 
pathogens, Cutibacterium acnes and Staphylococcus au-
reus, was inhibited in presence of scFOS. The competi-
tion between strains for scFOS use indicated a selective 
enhancement of S. epidermidisgrowth at the expenses of 
both C. acnesand S. aureus.In addition, S. epidermidis-
showed the highest colonizationpotential and 1% scFOS 
was effective in shifting the competition in favour of 
S. epidermidiswithrespect to C. acnesin the RHE model.
This latter effect was observed following 24 h of exposure, 
suggesting a long-­term effect of scFOS in a highly skin dy-
namic environment.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrated that scFOSc an 
modulate the composition of the skin microbiota by inhib-
iting the growth of potentially pathogenic bacteria and, at 
the same time, promoting the growth of beneficial bacte-
ria. Therefore, scFOS could be effectively implemented in 
skincare formulations for well-­balancing skin microbiota.
Keywords: cosmetic, fructo-­oligosaccharides, prebiotic, 
skincare, skin microbiota
INNOVATIVE INSTRUMENTATION FOR 
ASSESSING THE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF 
SKIN
B. Blanchard1,*; F. Ehrenfeld1; A. Laffore1; C. Nardin1; 
G. Percoco2; L. Peno-­Mazzarino2; C. Derail1
1Universite de Pau et des pays de l'Adour, E2S UPPA, 
CNRS, IPREM, Pau, France; 2BIO-­EC Laboratory, 
Longjumeau, France
The global viscoelastic properties of human skin play a key 
role in skin integrity, as they confer to the cutaneous tissue 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 37 ===
|  37
ABSTR​ACT
its ability to remain intact. Measuring these mechanical 
properties has in general a triple interest:
(i) To obtain a description of the natural history of the 
skin over the years;
(ii) To have a method for objective evaluation of the effect 
of some medical or dermo-­cosmetic products;
(iii) To observe and quantify skin pathologies that can lead 
to an alteration of the tissue mechanical properties.
In this context, a specific instrument to assess the viscoe-
lastic properties of ex vivo human skin has been devel-
oped. This device can be adapted to evaluate viscoelastic 
properties in in vivo conditions. The main objective is to 
characterize the two mechanical components, elasticity 
and dissipation, at different frequencies in order to dis-
criminate each phenomenon.
This patented technology combined with the use of ex 
vivo skin samples under physiological conditions for sev-
eral days, allows the study of the effect of different stresses 
on the skin. For example, mechanical analyses on stretch 
marks and on medicinal or cosmetic products with a rec-
ognized impact on the skin show that this technology can 
contribute to answering scientific questions and could 
help in the development of products intended for treat-
ments. The approach proposed with this technology is to 
perform spectromechanical analysis to propose finally a 
phenomenological link with the structure of the skin.
Indeed, this technology could have an impact in the sci-
entific and medical fields because it allows to analyse and 
evaluate in an objective way:
• the effects of different external stresses (stretch marks, 
exposure to UV rays, pollution by a chemical product or 
by the atmosphere, incision, etc.)
• the effects of medical or dermo-­cosmetic products 
(moisturizing creams, anti-­stretch mark creams, heal-
ing dressings, etc.)
• on the viscoelastic properties of human skin. In this 
poster, we will describe the technology and show the 
first results obtained to demonstrate.
• the device's ability to accurately explore the mechanical 
properties of skin under stresses.
Keywords: health, human skin, mechanics; rheology
Reference:[1] Patent N° PCT/FR2021/052389.
DERMAL FIBROBLASTS ARE IMPORTANT 
RELAY CELLS IN SKIN INFLAMMATION, 
HIGHLY SENSITIVE TO INTERLEUKIN 1 
RELEASED BY LESIONED KERATINOCYTES
S. Cordier-­Dirikoc1; N. Pedretti1; J. Garnier1; 
S. Clarhaut-­Charreau1,2; B. Ryffel3; F. Morel2; 
V. H. de Almeida1; F.-­X. Bernard1; J.-­C. Lecron2,4; 
J.-­F. Jégou2,*
1Qima-­Bioalternatives (Qima Life Sciences), Gençay, 
France; 2Université de Poitiers, LITEC, UR15560, Poitiers, 
France; 3INEM, CNRS, UMR 7355, Orléans, France; 
4Service d'Immunologie et Inflammation, CHU de Poitiers, 
France
Objective: Keratinocytes are the major source of interleu-
kin 1 (IL-­1) which is released after epidermal injury and 
contributes to trigger sterile skin inflammation. Little is 
known about the potential target skin cells that express 
IL-­1 receptors and that could act as intermediate cells in 
the inflammatory process. In this study, we have inves-
tigated the capacity of keratinocytes, dermal fibroblasts, 
melanocytes and endothelial cells to respond to IL-­1 in 
order to identify the main target of IL-­1 in the skin.
Methods: The expression profiles of cytokines and recep-
tors of the IL-­1 family have been determined by RT-­qPCR 
in the different skin cell populations. Skin cells were 
stimulated in vitro with keratinocyte extracts or recombi-
nant cytokines of the IL-­1 family to measure IL-­6 and IL-­8 
secretion by ELISA. Neutrophil migration assays were 
performed using these keratinocyte supernatants in the 
Boyden chamber system. To evaluate the role of IL-­1 in 
vivo, a model of superficial epidermal lesion in wild-­type 
and IL-­1R1-­deficient mice was used. In mouse lesioned 
skins, the expression of proinflammatory mediators was 
analysed by RT-­qPCR and neutrophil infiltration was 
evaluated by immunohistofluorescence.
Results: Among the different skin cells, we show that 
dermal fibroblasts expressed by far the highest level of 
the IL-­1R1 chain together with the IL-­1RAP chain to form 
the functional receptor that binds both IL-­1α and IL-­1β. 
In vitro, fibroblasts are the most responsive skin cells to 
IL-­1α/β released by injured keratinocytes, and secrete 
high levels of IL-­6 and IL-­8. Interestingly, we demonstrate 
that fibroblasts are very sensitive to very low concentra-
tions of IL-­1 α/β (from 0.01 pg/mL), even in the presence 
of 100-­fold higher concentrations of the antagonist IL-­
1RA. IL-­1-­activated fibroblasts have the capacity to attract 
neutrophils through their release of IL-­8 as demonstrated 
by cell migration assay. Moreover, we show that aseptic 
epidermal lesion on mouse back induces skin infiltration 
of neutrophils in an IL-­1-­dependent manner as demon-
strated by the decreased expression of proinflammatory 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 38 ===
38  |     
​ABS​TRACT
markers and the reduced neutrophil infiltration in the 
skin of IL-­1R1-­deficient mice compared to wild-­type mice.
Conclusion: Dermal fibroblasts are the most sensitive 
cells to IL-­1 released by injured keratinocytes after aseptic 
epidermal lesion by releasing IL-­8 and promoting neutro-
phil recruitment for tissue repair.
Keywords: epidermal lesion, fibroblasts, interleukin 1, 
neutrophils, skin inflammation
RAMAN SPECTROSCOPY INVESTIGATION OF 
SKIN AGING IN HEALTHY HUMANS
A. C. Caritá1; H. Kichou1; J. Marchand2; F. Vial2; 
E. Munnier1,*
1Université de Tours, Faculté de Pharmacie, EA6295 
NMNS «NanoMédicaments et NanoSondes», 31 avenue 
Monge, Tours -­France; 2Eurofins SPINCONTROL, 238 rue 
Giraudeau, Tours, France
Objective: The skin is subject to several structural, bio-
chemical, and functional modifications during the life span 
of an individual. Even if considerable research has already 
been done on the subject, the aging process remains not fully 
understood. A better understanding of its mechanisms can 
benefit the development of cosmetic products. In this study, 
the technique of Raman Spectroscopy was used to evaluate 
age-­related skin changes in healthyvolunteers in-­vivo.
Methods: 19 Caucasian volunteers aged from 18 to 
66 years old enrolled in this study. The volunteers were 
divided into two groups: a younger group (≤25 years old) 
and an older one (≥55 years old).The measurements were 
performed on the inner forearm of the volunteers after an 
acclimation time in an environmentally controlled room. 
The depth profiles of several skin constituents (water, li-
pids, NMF, proteins), as well as the thickness of the stra-
tum corneum (SC), were obtained.
Results: The average SC thickness was determined to be 
18.22 ± 0.89 μm and 19.26 ± 1.10 μm in the younger and 
older group, respectively.The analysis of water content 
revealed that both groups present a similar water profile 
at the SC, but the older group has a higher water content 
at the deeper layers of the epidermis and dermis. Besides, 
it was possible to note that the older group presents more 
NMF and cholesterol content in the SC and at the begin-
ning of the viable epidermis compared to the younger 
one. For protein, both groups presented similar content at 
the outerpart of the SC, but the older group showed more 
protein at the inner part of the SC and viable epidermis. 
Ultimately, for ceramides and fatty acids, only slight dif-
ferences were observed between the groups.
Conclusion: Results show that despite the general decline 
of diverse bodily functions with age, it appears that the 
content of some skin constituents, especially water, NMF, 
and cholesterol does not deteriorate but rather improves 
with aging. Additionally, this study reinforces the innova-
tive character of the technique of Raman Spectroscopy in 
detecting semi-­quantitatively subtle skin modifications in 
healthy skin.
Keywords: in-­vivo, Raman Spectroscopy, skin aging
Acknowledgments: The authors thank the Conseil 
Régional Centre Val de Loire for funding(ARD CVL 
Cosmétosciences -­Project MINIONs2020-­00141275).
References: McCullough J. L., Kelly K. M. Prevention 
and treatment of skin aging. AnnNY. AcadSci, 2006, 
1067(1), 323–­331.
Caspers, P. J., Bruining, H. A., Puppels, G. J., Lucassen, G. 
W., Carter, E. A. In vivo confocal Raman microspectros-
copy of the skin: noninvasive determination of molecular 
concentration profiles. JID,2001,116(3), 434–­442.
MIMICKING THE EXTRACELLULAR 
MATRIX TO BETTER UNDERSTAND THE 
SKIN FUNCTION: IN VITRO STUDY OF 
HYALURONIDASE IN PRESENCE OF CROWDERS
R. Nasreddine1; J. Hamacek2; J. C. Vidos2; F. Piazza2; 
R. Nehmé1,*
1Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique, Université 
d'Orléans, CNRS FR 2708, UMR 7311, Orléans, France; 
2Center for Molecular Biophysics (CBM), CNRS Orléans, 
rue Charles Sadron, Orleans Cedex 2 45 071, France
Mimicking the extracellular matrix (ECM) to develop 
drug candidates or to elucidate the biological mechanisms 
are gaining more attention aiming at better understanding 
the metalloenzyme function in the skin.
To reach our goal, artificial crowders were used in in vitro 
assays as a model to study the kinetic of hyaluronidase 
one of the metalloenzyme abundant in the extracellular 
matrix and especially in the skin. Polyethylene glycol 
(PEG) 6000, an artificial neutral crowder, was selected to 
determine its effect on the catalytic activity of hyaluroni-
dase [1]. The latter randomly cleaves the long chains of 
hyaluronic acid (HA), an important polysaccharide abun-
dant in the extracellular matrix, especially in the skin [2].
In this work, capillary electrophoresis (CE) was used to 
analyse the activity of bovine testicular hyaluronidase 
(Hyal) in PEG crowded media at different concentrations. 
CE-­UV enabled the detection and quantification of differ-
ent degradation products, as well as the substrate, HA. The 
amounts of the final product (Tet) as well as intermediates 
were evaluated at different concentrations of crowders. 
Interestingly, PEG showed a significant inhibitory effect 
on HA degradation particularly at 10% of PEGcompared 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 39 ===
|  39
ABSTR​ACT
to PEG added at 17% [3]. The effect of epigallocatechin 
gallate (EGCG), a reference hyaluronidase inhibitor, and 
two original synthetic inhibitors, chondroitin sulfate (CS) 
[4] were also examined in the presence of PEG at 10%. 
EGCG did not show any additional inhibition towards 
Hyal at 0.65 mM contrary to the originally inhibitors at 
the same concentration. These experimental results were 
then numerically modelized aiming at explaining the pro-
cess of degradation of hyaluronic acid in near real condi-
tions closed to skin environment in order to develop more 
efficiently cosmetic products to skin aging. This model 
could be extendedto other metalloenzyme such as colla-
genase and elastase.
Keywords: mechanisms of action, measurement of bio-
logical activity, skin aging
References: [1] I.M. Kuznetsova, K.K. Turoverov, V.N. 
Uversky, What Macromolecular Crowding Can Do to a 
Protein, Int J Mol Sci. 15 (2014) 23090–­23140.
[2] Helm Ii, S. & Racz, G. Hyaluronidase in Neuroplasty: 
A Review. Pain Physician22, 555–­560 (2019).
[3] R. Nasreddine, L. Orlic, G. Al Hamoui Dit Banni, S. 
Fayad, A. Marchal, et al.. Polyethylene glycol crowding 
effect on hyaluronidase activity monitored by capillary 
electrophoresis. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. (2020), 412 (17), 
pp.4195–­4207.
[4] S. Fayad, B. Ayela, C. Chat, P. Morin, C. Lopin-­Bon, R. 
Nehmé, Effect of modified di-­and trisaccharides on hya-
luronidase activity assessed by capillary electrophoresis-­
based enzymatic assay, Carbohydr. Res. 475 (2019) 56–­64.
MOLECULAR SKIN EFFECTS OF BLUE 
LIGHT EXPOSURE: CHARA​CTE​RIZ​ATION 
OF EPIDERMAL LIPIDOME BY NORMAL-­
PHASE HIGH-­PERFORMANCE LIQUID 
CHROMATOGRAPHY COUPLED WITH HIGH-­
RESOLUTION MASS SPECTROMETRY
L. Habib1,2; R. Michael-­Jubeli1,*; M. Abboud2; R. Lteif2; 
A. Tfayli1
1Lip(sys)2-­ Chimie Analytique Pharmaceutique, Université 
Paris-­Saclay, Orsay, France; 2Laboratoire d'étude 
cinétique en milieu hétérogène (LECH), Université Saint-­
Joseph, Liban
Lifestyle changes associated with the intensive use of 
digital tools lead to increased exposure to artificial screen 
light, especially blue light.
The possible effects of blue light exposure on the skin can 
vary depending on its intensity and wavelength, poten-
tially causing harm, or providing benefits. Several studies 
highlight the effects of blue light on the macromolecu-
lar mechanical properties and the skin barrier function. 
Although clinical studies are more likely to provide infor-
mation on the short-­term effects of blue light exposure, 
the full understanding of the biological effects of repeated 
and/or longer-­term exposure is not yet clear.
The purpose of this study is to determine the molecular 
impact of blue light exposure on the lipid composition of 
the reconstructed human epidermis (RHE).
In order to achieve this, RHE samples, imitating in vivo 
conditions, were repeatedly exposed to two wavelengths 
(415 and 455 nm) at different doses during several days of 
maturation (from day 14 to day 20).
The complex composition and organization of lipid 
classes and subclasses such as ceramides, glucosylcera-
mides, sphingomyelins, cholesterol, and free fatty acids, 
are responsible for the key role of epidermal lipids in skin 
barrier function.
Lipid extracts from control and exposed RHE samples 
were analysed by normal-­phase high-­performance liq-
uid chromatography coupled with high-­resolution mass 
spectrometry NP-­HPLC /HR-­MSn. This technique al-
lows separation of lipid classes of different polarity in a 
single analysis, permitting the characterization of their 
fine structures. It was observed that the effect of blue light 
induces significant changes in lipid profiles over time, de-
pending on the applied dose and maturation day. These 
results provide valuable insights into lipid metabolism 
that could aid in the detection of skin barrier dysfunction.
The approach developed in this study provides an addi-
tional source of information regarding the effects of blue 
light. It may also facilitate the evaluation of the efficacy of 
protective and/or regenerative agents.
Keywords: blue light, lipids, NP-­HPLC/HR-­MSn, recon-
structed human epidermis
Human Perceptions of 
Beauty in a Changing 
Environment
SENSITIVE SKIN MICROBIOME OF JAPANESE 
WOMEN
N. Shibagaki*
MIRAI Technology Institute, Shiseido Co., Ltd., 
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan
OBJECTIVES: Sensitive skin has been stated as a syn-
drome defined by the occurrence of unpleasant sensations 
in response to stimuli that normally should not provoke 
such sensations in the expert position paper [1]. Since skin 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 40 ===
40  |     
​ABS​TRACT
microbiome has been shown to be involved in skin‘s bar-
rier function and homeostasis and chemical composition 
all of which could contribute to sensitive skin conditions, 
we decided to examine skin microbiome of sensitive skin 
(SS) and non-­sensitive skin (NS) to understand the in-
volvement of microbiome in skin sensitivity.
METHODS: Healthy Japanese women in age 20–­59 were 
recruited. Among them, 22 subjects whose face skins can 
sense as low as 1% lactic acid against water are defined 
as SS group and the other group of subjects that do not 
distinguish 1% lactic acid are NS group. 16 rRNA gene am-
plicon sequencing with V1-­V2 was conducted using DNA 
extracted from the samples collected from subjects‘ fore-
head (FH) and cheek (CK).
RESULTS: Skin microbiome of SS group in (FH) and CK 
was found to have unique features compared to those of NS 
group, while no significant difference was observed in skin 
physiological parameters such as temperature, hydration, 
sebum, transepidermal water loss, pH, colour, elasticity and 
appearance, determined by instrumental measurement. 
Skin microbiome of SS group was lower in α-­diversity repre-
sented by smaller Shannon index and number of observed 
species and β-­diversity among SS group was also lower than 
among NS group or SS-­NS. Relative abundance of genus 
Propionibacterium (recently renamed Cutibacterium) in FH 
was significantly higher in SS than NS. This difference is ap-
parent in the skin of moderate or low bacterial load, where 
relative abundance of Propionibacterium varies from 18% 
to 98%. In the moderate/low bacterial load group, all skin 
microbiome of SS group showed high Propionibacterium 
abundance except two elderly subjects over 50, while NS 
group was mostly with low Propionibacterium abundance.
CONCLUSION: Predominance of Propionibacterium 
over other genera with moderate bacteria number was 
identified as a unique feature of SS skin microbiome in 
Japanese women, suggesting involvement of skin microbi-
ome in the occurrence of sensitive skin in this population.
REFERENCE
1. Misery et al., “Definition of Sensitive Skin: An Expert 
Position Paper from the Special Interest Group on 
Sensitive Skin of the International Forum for the Study of 
Itch” Acta Derm Venerol 2017; 97: 4–­6.
KEY WORDS: sensitive skin, lactic acid, microbiome, 
16S rDNA, Propionibacterium, Cutibacterium
PLAYING ON C. ACNES-­DERIVED 
EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES: A NEW WAY TO 
CONTROL THE DEVELOPMENT OF ACNE-­LIKE 
CHARACTERISTICS IN HUMAN SKIN CELLS
C. Bize1,*; G. Vincent1; P. Martin2; M. Fontanié2
1Seppic Research & Innovation, 50 boulevard national, 
92257 La Garenne Colombes Cedex, France; 2Vibiosphen 
SAS, prologue biotech, 516 rue Pierre et Marie curie, 31670 
Labège Cedex, France
OBJECTIVE: Among the multiple commensal microor-
ganisms present in the healthy skin flora, Cutibacterium 
acnes (C. acnes) is a ubiquitous Gram-­positive aerotoler-
ant anaerobic bacterium belonging to the Actinobacteria 
phylum, that predominantly resides deep within the 
sebaceous follicle, in contact with keratinocytes. Like 
mammalian cells, in addition to soluble factors, most 
Gram-­negative and -­positive bacteria release extracellular 
vesicles (EVs) which can be involved in the intercellular 
communication within or between living organisms. By 
harbouring diverse proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and me-
tabolites originating from the parent cells, EVs transfer 
biologically active molecules to neighbouring and distant 
cells for communication and influence. In particular, bac-
terial EVs are known to mediate pathophysiological func-
tions in bacteria–­bacteria and bacteria–­host interactions.
In this context, we investigated the effects of C. acnes EVs 
isolated from phylotype IA1 (DSM1897 strain) on both 
human keratinocytes and sebocytes.
METHODS: EVs derived from C. acnes DSM1897 were 
isolated by ultrafiltration. Some of EVs were labelled with 
the lipophilic fluorescent dye Vybrant DiI cell-­labeling so-
lution for 30 min at 37°C. EVs were added in the culture 
medium of keratinocytes or sebocytes. EV internalization 
was studied by fluorescent microscopy.
Production of IL-­8 and TNF-­α protein as well as filaggrin 
and β-­defensin 2, was assayed by ELISA. Sebocyte lipid 
production was also evaluated on sebocytes.
RESULTS: EVs significantly induced inflammatory cy-
tokine IL-­8 production and dysregulated epidermal dif-
ferentiation by increasing filaggrin protein expression. 
Moreover, extracellular vesicles seemed to stimulate 
the production of antimicrobial peptides (β-­defensin 2). 
However, this study did not reveal any modulation of 
TNF-­α in keratinocytes. Moreover, extracellular vesicles 
isolated from the virulent C. acnes strain stimulate the 
production of IL-­8 and TNF-­α on human sebocytes de-
rived from iPS. This inflammation induced by C. acnes 
EVs is a typical component of acne. C. acnes-­derived EVs 
also induce lipid production.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, these results suggest that 
EVs induce acne-­like phenotypes. Therefore, inhibiting 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 41 ===
|  41
ABSTR​ACT
the release of EVs from C. acnes or targeting EV-­mediated 
signalling pathways could represent an alternative method 
for alleviating acne occurrence and phenotypes.
KEY WORDS: C. acnes, acne vulgaris, extracellular vesi-
cles, keratinocytes, sebocytes
HUMAN GUT-­ON-­CHIP MODEL: 
RECONSTITUTION OF EUKARYOTE-­
PROKARYOTE MICRO​ENV​IRO​NMENT, HUMAN 
INTESTINE MIMICRY AND POTENTIAL 
COUPLING WITH A SKIN-­ON-­A-­CHIP MODEL
M. Zommiti1; M. G. J. Feuilloley1,*
1Research Unit Bacterial Communication and Anti-­
Infectious Strategies (UR4312 CBSA), University of Rouen, 
Normandy, 27000 Évreux, France
OBJECTIVE: A miniaturized microphysiological system 
(MPS) has been used, as a cutting-­ edge technology, to 
culture Caco-­2 cells, to mainly mimic human intestinal 
specific eukaryote-­ prokaryote microenvironment con-
taining (probiotics and/or pathogens), and beyond [1]. 
Such a system is also known as Gut-­On-­a-­Chip. Herein, 
we highlight the modus operandi of this Gut-­ On-­a-­Chip 
model development and potential coupling with a Skin-­
On-­Chip model.
METHODS: After an adequate coating of the membrane, 
Caco-­2 cells were seeded and left to grow under dynamic 
flow, 30 μL/h, of complete DMEM medium at 37°C for 
about 120 hours nonstop. Subsequently, application of 
probiotic bacteria in solo or in co-­culture with pathogens 
in the microfluidic chip was performed on differentiated 
Caco-­2 cells in order to reconstitute Eukaryote-­Prokaryote 
human intestinal microenvironment.
RESULTS: After approximately 120 h of culture nonstop, the 
application of the fluorochrome phalloidin 488, led to label 
the cell cytoskeleton junctions. Trypsinized Caco-­2 cells from 
the microfluidic chip, have shown relevant growth in DMEM 
medium from the 5th day, and the micronuclei formation 
test has shown positive results reflecting their potential to 
form binucleate cells. Then, to mimic the human intestine, 
several pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus RN4220 
(RFP*), Escherichia coli DH5α (CFP*) and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa H103 (GFP*) were applied on the differentiated 
Caco-­2 cells, showing significant adhesion onto the Caco-­2 
cells. The polyethylene terephthalate (PET) membrane, on 
which cells were grown, were observed via Scanning electron 
microscope (SEM) and confocal microscopy after specific 
labeling. Results were so promising in terms of cells differ-
entiation, villi formation and reconstitution of eukaryote-­
prokaryote human intestinal microenvironment.
The skin and gut have a bidirectional crosstalk, and many 
studies link intestinal health to skin homeostasis [2]. 
Scientific investigation demonstrated the implication of 
gut microbiome in skin ailments and disorders via differ-
ent pathways, notably through immunologic (immune 
activation by probiotics), metabolite (SCFAs produced by 
the gut microbiome) and neuroendocrine pathways [3].
CONCLUSION: To wrap up, a Gut-­On-­a-­Chip model 
(with direct application of probiotics in solo or with other 
metabolites such SCFAs) coupled, via the blood compart-
ment (bloodstream), to a Skin-­On-­a-­Chip miniaturized 
device seems to be the most adequate approach to study 
skin ailments (Atopic dermatitis as an example).
KEY WORDS: Microfluidics, Gut-­On-­Chip, Human in-
testine mimicry, Caco-­2 cells, Skin-­On-­Chip
REFERENCES
1. Kim, H.J., Huh, D., Hamilton, G., Ingber, D.E. Lab Chip 
2012, 12: 2165–­74.
2. De Pessemier, B., Grine, L., Debaere, M., Callewaert, C. 
Microorganisms 2021, 9: 353.
3. Sinha, S., Lin, G., Ferenczi, K. Clinics in Dermatology 
2021, 39: 829–­83.
EMOTION, SKIN, COSMETICS: MARKETING 
OR REAL SCIENTIFIC PSYCH​OBI​OLO​GICAL 
APPROACH?
E. Filaire1,*; R. Nachat-­Kappes2; S. Boiznic3; L. Falcao4
1Université Clermont Auvergne, UMR 1019 INRAE-­ 
human nutrition Unity, ECREIN team, 63000 Clermont-­
Ferrand, France; 2InnovSkin, 63140 Chatel-­Guyon, 
France; 3Société GREDECO, 45 bd Vincent Auriol, 75013 
Paris; 4Inaturals, 2bis impasse Henri Mouret 84000 
Avignon, France
OBJECTIVE: Cosmetic products have been overtaken 
by a more holistic concept that goes beyond physical 
appearance and focuses more on improving consumer 
well-­being through positive emotions. Evaluation of 
emotions is most often carried out through declarative 
component conducted within a categorical or dimensional 
design. This is particularly the case in cosmetic. Some 
studies have also focused on the measurement of the 
behavioural/expressive 
component, 
combining 
the 
measurement of verbal component (prosody, verbatims) 
and measurement of facial expressions, evaluation 
which also poses some problems [1]. In this context, 
evaluation of psychophysiological parameters appears as 
an avenue for improvement the study of understanding 
emotions in consumer behaviour [2]. Thus, the aim of our 
experimentation was to evaluate not only the soothing 
effect of an active ingredient on reactive and sensitive 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 42 ===
42  |     
​ABS​TRACT
skin but also its effect on psychobiological parameters 
reflecting a better well-­being.
METHODS: 35 women (among 10 included in a placebo 
group) aged 45–­55 years old with skin phototypes II to IV 
and dry, sensitive skin were enrolled in this study. The 
study was performed by a comparison of before and after 
a serum face application including an active ingredient 
formulated at 0.5% or a placebo. They were asked to rate 
the cosmetic benefits on mood, emotion, well-­being, self-­
esteem, and stress, each being applied over a period of 28 
consecutive days. As this study was conceived in a holis-
tic perspective, we addressed psychological parameters 
in addition to salivary cortisol, dehydroandrosterone and 
alpha-­amylase evaluation.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Cosmetics usage has 
the potential to have an impact on individual‘s body 
image and self-­esteem. Besides subjective reports and 
psychological tests, objective non-­invasive psychophysi-
ological measurements can be used to record the effect 
of certain active ingredients on cognitive and emotional 
states by using salivary parameters reflecting not only the 
hypothalamo-­pituitary–­adrenal axis but also the sympa-
thetic activity. All these physiological reactions are the 
result of unconscious mental processes that cannot be 
controlled. Adopting this approach, we showed this type 
of measurement associated with psychological indicators 
provide a scientific approach to examine the benefit of a 
cosmetic product in the well-­being area.
KEY 
WORDS: 
Emotion, 
Saliva, 
Cortisol, 
Dehydroandrosterone, Alpha-­amylase, Sensitive skin
REFERENCES
1. Droulers, O., Lajante, M., Sage Journals, 2015, 45–­78.
2. Gil, S., Revue électronique de Psychologie Sociale, 
2009, 4: 14–­24.
PSYCHOBIOTICS: EMOTIONAL BENEFITS OF 
IMPROVED SCALP CONDITION
C. Zanchetta1,*; M. Meunier1; E. Chapuis1; C. Jarrin1; 
J. Brooks2; H. Carolan2; C. Lambert1; B. Sennelier1; 
A. Scandolera1; R. Reynaud1
1Givaudan Active Beauty, France; 2Givaudan, UK
Introduction: Social stress is a major component of the 
exposome and can be linked to the emergence of some 
skin problems. One of these is collapse of epidermal ho-
meostasis on the scalp, provoking symptoms such as dry 
flakes. These symptoms have a profound impact on qual-
ity of life resulting in increased appearance-­related social 
anxiety. A novel strategy to deal with these symptoms is 
through the use of topically-­applied psychobiotics, ingre-
dients that improve wellness by feeding the microbiome. 
For this study we examined the link between scalp dry-
ness, skin microbiota and emotions.
Methods: Two clinical studies were conducted on volun-
teers with dry scalp and white flakes. In the first, we eval-
uated microbiota composition in people with dry scalp. 
In the second, the emotional state of volunteers with dry 
scalp was evaluated using three complementary neurosci-
ence methods. Armed with this knowledge of how scalp 
dryness affects the microbiota's composition and the emo-
tions, we assessed how these parameters changed after ap-
plying Pogostemon cablin leaf extract for 1 month.
Results: The skin microbiota of dry scalp was imbal-
anced, with increased alpha diversity (+24%) and de-
creased Cutibacterium abundance (−54%) compared to 
oilier skin. According to prosody analysis, the emotional 
state of people with scalp dryness mainly centred around 
negative feelings related to non-­happiness, with a low 
vocal frequency and amplitude. Following application of 
Pogostemon cablin leaf extract for 1 month, scalp sebum 
was increased by +34%, the microbiome was rebalanced, 
and dry flakes were decreased by −33%. Volunteers also 
expressed more positive emotions such as comfort, care 
and happiness, and their vocal frequency and amplitude 
significantly increased.
Discussion and Conclusion: The results of this study 
show for the very first time that improved scalp condi-
tion and rebalanced skin microbiota following applica-
tion of a psychobiotic led to a significant improvement in 
volunteers' emotional status. Based on these results with 
Pogostemon cablin leaf extract, we can confirm the effi-
cacy of topically applied psychobiotics and their potential 
for inclusion in the formulation of future psycare.
Keywords: emotions, exposome, neurocosmetics, psy-
chobiotics, scalp disorders
GYNANDROPSIS GYNANDRA EXTRACT LIMITS 
DEVELOPMENT OF ACNE BY PRESERVING 
MICROBIAL BALANCE AND ASSOCIATED 
VIRULENCE FACTORS
M. Le Roux*; S. Leclère-­Bienfait; G. Bellemère; 
C. Baudouin
1Laboratoires Expanscience, Innovation Research and 
Development, Epernon, France
Objective: Acne in adult women has increased in recent 
years and remains a major concern. Often associated 
with an overgrowth of the bacteria Cutibacterium acnes 
(C. acnes), acne would be mainly due to a loss of diversity 
and an imbalance between healthy and acne-­prone strains 
of this bacteria (dysbiosis). In addition, C. acnes produces 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 43 ===
|  43
ABSTR​ACT
virulence factors (biofilm, porphyrins) which contribute 
to the pathogenic character of these strains and are in-
volved in the virulence of acne. We have obtained new 
results which confirm the efficacy of our active ingredient 
from Gynandropsis gynandra (GG) to restore skin micro-
biota balance and fight acne.
Methods: Bacterial growth study: A mixture of commen-
sal and pathogenic bacterial strains, representative of cu-
taneous microbiota, was cultivated in a liquid medium for 
48 h with GG extract. The growth of each bacterium strain 
was evaluated after subculture on specific agar.
Porphyrin quantification: Two strains of C. acnes (phylo-
types I and II) were incubated with GG extract for 48 h. 
Porphyrin assay was performed.
Biofilm study: Biofilm formation of two strains of C. acnes 
(phylotypes I and II) was studied using crystal violet dye.
Squalene oxidation (in tubo test): squalene was incubated 
with ozone and active ingredient.
Squalene and its metabolites were extracted and quanti-
fied by gas chromatography–­mass spectrometry.
Results: GG inhibited the growth of pathogenic strain of 
C. acnes without affecting the growth of commensal bac-
teria. GG strongly inhibited the production of porphyrins 
by acne-­associated strain of C. acnes (phylotype I) and did 
not modulate the concentration of porphyrins produced 
by the healthy strain (phylotype II). GG also limited bio-
film formation of acne-­associated strain with no effect on 
healthy strain. These results showed a specific effect of 
GG extract on acne-­associated strain.
Moreover, GG showed a protective effect against the deg-
radation of squalene. It limited ozone-­induced squalene 
degradation as well as the generation of primary metabo-
lites related to squalene oxidation.
Conclusion: These new in vitro results demonstrate 
the capacity of GG extract to limit the development of 
acne.
Keywords: 
acne, 
Cutibacterium acnes, 
phylotype, 
porphyrin
TEA OIL CONCENTRATE FROM CAMELLIA 
OLEIFERA, OBTAINED BY MOLECULAR 
DISTILLATION, TO IMPROVE SKIN COMFORT 
AND WELL-­BEING
M. Le Roux*; G. Boyer; S. Leclère-­Bienfait; G. Bellemère; 
C. Baudouin
Laboratoires Expanscience, Innovation Research and 
Development, Epernon, France
Objective: Psychological stress has multiple physiologi-
cal impacts on skin through release of mediators as neu-
ropeptide and cortisol. These mediators increase skin 
inflammation, itching, impair skin barrier, provoking skin 
discomfort that can amplify psychological stress, thus cre-
ating a real vicious circle.
We have developed a new active ingredient from Camellia 
oleifera seeds, tea oil concentrate (TOC), rich in unsaponi-
fiable fraction, evaluated by in vitro models and clinical 
studies.
Methods: Reinnervated epidermises were pre-­treated by 
TOC and stressed by lactic acid. Substance P release was 
measured by ELISA. Skin explants were pre-­treated by 
TOC before stimulation by adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH) and temperature. Cortisol release was evaluated 
by ELISA.
Skin explants altered by tape stripping were stressed by daily 
application of cortisol and TOC during 5 days. Barrier integ-
rity was analysed by Lucifer Yellow permeability and stra-
tum corneum thickness by Haematoxylin/Eosin staining.
Two clinical studies were performed (2 groups of 20 
women for each one, Active vs. Placebo) on subjects 
with sensitive and dry skin. Subjects in the first study ex-
pressed impact of their skin condition on their psychologi-
cal stress. Assessment of the TOC efficacy was performed 
using clinical scoring, questionnaires, physiological meas-
urement of stress (vocal stress, heart rate variability, ver-
batim) and biomarkers (IL1-­α and cortisol).
Results: TOC significantly decreased the release of sub-
stance P induced by lactic acid and decreased the cortisol 
release stimulated by ACTH and temperature. In a skin 
explant model mimicking the effect of cortisol on skin 
barrier, TOC decreased the lucifer yellow permeability 
and increased the stratum corneum thickness indicating 
an improvement in the barrier integrity.
Results of clinical studies demonstrated that TOC im-
proved self-­perception, decreased skin sensitivity symp-
toms, reduced sensitive and dry skin clinical signs 
(redness, roughness, scaling, dryness) and reduced the im-
pact of dry and sensitive skin on stress (decrease of vocal 
stress, increase of heart rate variability). TOC also reduced 
skin inflammation and stress assessed respectively by IL1-­ 
α and cortisol release.
Conclusion: By counteracting the vicious circle of stress, 
TOC promotes skin comfort and improves the well-­being 
of dry and sensitive skin.
Keywords: cortisol, sensitive skin, substance P, unsapon-
ifiable, well-­being
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 44 ===
44  |     
​ABS​TRACT
PREDICTING FACIAL SKIN AGE IN HEALTHY 
FEMALE CAUCASIAN POPULATION USING IN 
VIVO IMAGING TECHNIQUES COUPLED TO AI 
BASED DATA MINING PROTOCOLS
G. Guénolé1; B. Franck1,*; R. Samuel1; P. Mélanie2; 
F. Sébastien2; L. Colombe2; L. Agnes3; N. Meryem3; 
P. Jean-­Christophe4; C. Jean-­Hubert1; K. Rodolphe1
1LVMH Recherche, 185 Avenue de Verdun, Saint Jean de 
Braye 48 804, France; 2DAMAE Medical, 14 rue Sthrau, 
Paris 75 013, France; 3DERMATECH, 8 Rue Jacqueline 
Auriol, Lyon 69 008; 4ORION CONCEPT, 56 Rue de Suède, 
Tours 37 100, France
Objective: Deciphering the correlation between the per-
ception of skin appearance and physiological biomarkers 
remains a challenge for the cosmetic industry to develop 
optimal topical treatment to reduce clinical signs of aging. 
Non-­invasive imaging techniques coupled with Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) have a key role to play in quantifying 
modifications in microstructures at cellular levels to un-
derstand macroscopic changes. Presently, a multimodal 
approach combining quantitative biomarkers computed 
from High Frequency UltraSounds (HFUS) and Line-­field 
Confocal Optical Coherence Tomography (LC-­OCT) im-
aging was developed as a tool for multiparametric pre-
diction of facial skin age. The comparison of results with 
clinical scoring performed by dermatologists aims at dem-
onstrating that objective instrumental approaches can be 
developed to elucidate and monitor the biological mecha-
nism of ageing.
Methods: A clinical study including 100 Caucasian fe-
male volunteers evenly distributed in 5 age groups (20–­30, 
31–­40, 41–­50, 51–­60 and 61–­70 years old) was conducted 
under ethical supervision. Quantitative metrics were 
computed from HFUS and LC-­OCT images acquired from 
different facial areas (temple, cheekbone, mandible, fore-
head). A set of data mining protocols using Splines Partial 
Least Squares-­Discriminant Analysis (sPLS-­DA) and 
random forest in a leave-­one-­out cross validation were 
applied to construct predictive classification models for 
facial skin aging.
Results: The prediction of age groups using clinical 
scores delivered low sensitivity (54.0%) and specificity 
(82.6%). Firmness, density, plump, elasticity and wrinkles 
appearance are criteria based on qualitative scales, hence 
lacking descriptive power. The correlation between mac-
roscopic observations and aging is therefore limited. In 
comparison, predictive models constructed using HFUS 
and LC-­OCT acquisitions on different parts of the face, 
showed higher sensitivity (98.0%) and specificity (99.5%). 
The combination of quantitative structural descriptors of 
the collagen matrix in the dermis with 3D quantitative 
cellular metrics in the living epidermis enabled to identify 
specific biomarkers that better model age-­related intracu-
taneous modifications in facial skin.
Conclusion: A reliable and robust multimodal imaging 
tool was developed thanks to AI based data mining pro-
tocols. While it is a promising approach to further inves-
tigate the aging process in vivo, it could also be a relevant 
tool for the evaluation of facial skin care products.
Keywords: artificial intelligence, healthy skin ageing, 
non-­invasive 3d imaging, quantitative biomarkers
A NOVEL SKIN BRIGHTENING COMPLEX TO 
COUNTERACT SIGNS OF SKIN PHOTOAGING: 
CYSTEAMINE & ISOBIONIC-­AMIDE
R. Sfriso1,*; L. Dirlewanger1; L. Clark-Loeser2
1Scientis, Geneva, Switzerland; 2Precision Skin Institute, 
Davie, Florida
Introduction: Age spots, are small hyperpigmented areas 
on the skin resulting from skin photoaging. They appear 
on photoexposed skin sites, such as face and hands, as a 
result of life-­long, chronic UV exposure and can be psy-
chologically bothering. Thus, consumers look for cosmetic 
solutions able to even the skin tone and restore a youthful 
appearance. Here, we present a novel lightening complex 
including cysteamine -­ a potent endogenous antioxidant 
having brightening efficacy by inhibiting the melanogenic 
enzymes tyrosinase and peroxidase -­ and isobionic-­amide, 
a derivative of vitamin B3 and inhibitor of melanosomal 
transfer.
Methods: Tyrosinase inhibition was assessed by incu-
bating tyrosinase (10 U) with each of the test substances 
(cysteamine and isobionic-­amide) as well as their com-
bination (both at a concentration of 100uM) and addi-
tion of L-­DOPA (1 mM), the substrate for tyrosinase. 
Absorbance was measured at 470 nm. The brightening 
efficacy of cysteamine isobionic-­amide complex was 
also assessed in an in vivo study involving 7 volunteers 
showing photoaging signs, such as wrinkles and dark 
spots, which applied the product daily on the full face 
for 16 weeks. High resolution images were acquired and 
questionnaires were provided to the investigators and to 
the volunteers.
Results: Both cysteamine and isobionic-­amide showed 
similar tyrosinase inhibitory activity (20% inhibition). 
When combined, the two molecules showed a synergis-
tic inhibition of tyrosinase (44% inhibition). In addition, 
the in vivo study showed visible skin lightening effects 
with improvements in the appearance of age spots and 
wrinkles reduction. Both the volunteers and the blinded 
investigators recognized improvements in skin radiance, 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 45 ===
|  45
ABSTR​ACT
texture, reduction of age spots and overall more homo-
geneous skin tone. Last but not least, their quality of life 
was significantly improved after 16 weeks of product use 
(p < 0.05), compared to baseline.
Conclusion: Our study shows that a novel skin bright-
ening complex has promising efficacy in counteracting 
signs of photoaging. We surprisingly found that isobionic-­
amide synergistically increases the tyrosinase inhibitory 
efficacy of cysteamine in vitro. Furthermore, the evidences 
collected on 7 volunteers support the high brightening 
properties and anti-­aging efficacy of the formulation with 
effects visible as early as week 4.
Keywords: cysteamine, hyperpigmentation, photoaging, 
skin, skin brightening
Interdisciplinary Science for 
Efficient Formulations
HOW CAN FORMULATION HELP US TO 
OVERCOME THE CHALLENGES OF DELIVERING 
COSMETIC ACTIVES?
M. E. Lane*
School of Pharmacy, University College London, United 
Kingdom
The skin has evolved to keep water in and other xenobiot-
ics or foreign substances out. The outer layer, the stratum 
corneum, is a unique membrane that is about a sixth of 
the thickness of a piece of paper. It is composed of dead 
cells that are filled with keratin and are very dense in na-
ture. Today we understand that it is this thin membrane 
that is the major barrier to effective targeting of actives 
from topical formulations.
Targeting of actives to specific regions of the epidermis 
and dermis is the ‘holy grail’ of skin delivery. However, 
skin penetration of most actives often does not exceed 
more than 2–­4% of the applied amount. Partly this re-
flects a lack of focus on the vehicle and a lack of aware-
ness that the fate of the active is linked inextricably to 
specific carrier components of the formulation. No single 
formulation can address the competing requirements of 
the diverse array of compounds we find in personal care 
and cosmetic products. Instead, consideration must be 
given to the solubility of the active in vehicle components 
as well as the residence time of those vehicle components 
in the skin. The overarching theme of my research is the 
identification of vehicle components that are optimal for a 
specific active. Over the years my work has demonstrated 
the utility of this approach using both in vitro and in vivo 
studies.
Advances in the range and sensitivity of analytical tech-
niques available to scientists are already providing better 
insights into vehicle effects on skin delivery of actives. 
Building on these findings, we should be optimistic about 
our ability to create better and more efficacious formula-
tions for consumers.
KEY WORDS: Skin, targeting, actives, formulation, in 
vitro, in vivo.
WATER-­LESS COSMETIC ARCHITECTURES: 
SCREENING OF NATURAL-­BASED 
MICROPARTICLES TO STABILIZE HIGH 
INTERNAL PHASE PICKERING EMULSIONS
M. Cafiero1,2 ,*; D. Huc-­Mathis1; M.-­N. Maillard1; 
S. Maniguet2; V. de La Poterie2
1Université Paris-­Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, UMR 
SayFood, 91120 Palaiseau, France; 2LVMH Recherche, 
45800 Saint-­Jean de Braye, France
Designing water-­reduced cosmetic architectures repre-
sents a path to create clean label emulsions and decrease 
tensions around water resources. This study focuses on 
the structuration of O/W emulsions highly concentrated 
in oil stabilized by solid particles, also known as “high 
internal phase Pickering emulsions” (HIPPEs). Its origi-
nality lies on the use of micrometric particles (>1 μm) to 
stabilize architectures instead of nanometric ones that 
could raise health issues.
Highly concentrated O/W emulsions formulated with polar 
or non-­polar lipid phases (up to 80%) and stabilized only by 
microparticles of various natural origins, sizes, and shapes 
were screened. The droplet size distribution, microstruc-
ture, relative stability (backscatter level evolution), pH and 
firmness of the emulsions were monitored over 2 weeks.
Micrometric particles have proven to be an efficient way 
to structure HIPPEs. Various systems can be generated 
with a wide range of microstructures (droplets from μm 
to a few mm), textures, behaviours, and properties (pH 
from nearly 5 to 10). This diversity can be accessed by 
just changing the particles size or origin. Similar obser-
vations are made when modifying the oil phase polarity. 
Coalescence stable W/O emulsions were also obtained 
with highly hydrophobic particles.
Clean label water-­less O/W emulsions can be stabilized 
only by naturally sourced solid microparticles. These prom-
ising architectures are a lead to create future clean label 
cosmetic templates. The interaction between oil/particles 
properties and the structure organization is to be further 
explored in order to identify the underlying mechanisms.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 46 ===
46  |     
​ABS​TRACT
KEY WORDS: High internal phase emulsion, Pickering, 
emulsion Microparticle, Cosmetic matrix, Clean label, 
Water-­less emulsion
FORMULABILITY OF NATURAL DEEP 
EUTECTIC SOLVENTS IN COSMETICS: A JOINT 
RHEOLOGICAL, CALORIMETRIC AND SENSORY 
ANALYSIS
A. Verger1; I. M. Ardeza2; A. Despres3; 
L. Boudesocque-­Delaye2; E. Munnier1,*
1EA 6295 Nanomédicaments et Nanosondes, Faculté 
de Pharmacie, Université de Tours, 31 Avenue Monge, 
37200 Tours, France; 2EA 7502 Synthèse et Isolement de 
Molécules BioActives (SIMBA), Université de Tours, 31 
Avenue Monge, 37200 Tours, France; 2RCP-­Design global, 
56 avenue Marcel Dassault, 37200 Tours, France
OBJECTIVES: Natural deep eutectic solvents (NaDES) 
are a new range of solvents made from biorefinery ingre-
dients. They are currently used in the cosmetic field for 
their extraction properties, as an eco-­friendly alternative 
to usual organic solvents. Their non volatility implies their 
inclusion in the final product alongside the molecules of 
interest. The first objective of this study was to measure 
the impact of the introduction of hydrophilic NaDES on 
the properties of a cosmetic gel. The second objective was 
to evaluate if the physico-­chemical and sensory character-
istics of the NaDES can help us predict their formulability.
METHODS: Three commonly used hydrophilic NaDES 
from the main families, organic acid-­based, amino-­acid 
based and sugar-­based NaDES, where analysed alone 
then introduced in a model cosmetic gel (1 and 10% wt.). 
A blank gel was used as a control. Rheological properties 
were investigated by flow and viscoelasticity experiments. 
Thermal behaviour was studied by Differential Scanning 
Calorimetry and Thermogravimetric Analysis. Finally, 
the impact of NaDES on cosmetic gel sensory properties 
was evaluated by an expert panel.
RESULTS: The impact of the introduction of NaDES in the 
gel is different from one family to another. Globally, gels 
maintain a rheofluidic behaviour, i.e. their viscosity de-
creases when the shear rate increases. The viscosity at low 
shear rates is dependent on the concentration of NaDES. 
This is less obvious for high shear rates, which correspond to 
the spreading, pumping in a vial or spraying. These results 
are confronted with calorimetric measurements. Finally, 
sensory analysis allows us to put the physico-­chemical re-
sults into perspective with the global impact on the con-
sumer‘s perception. Four descriptors were particularly 
relevant: odour, visual viscosity, stringyness and stickyness.
CONCLUSION: NaDES could be a major actor in the 
hands of the cosmetic industry to switch towards more 
environmentally friendly bio-­based ingredients prepara-
tion. Nevertheless, our results demonstrate that their use 
may have an impact on the consumer‘s experience and 
that this impact may be partially anticipated thanks to 
thorough study of the physico-­chemical and sensory prop-
erties of blank NaDES.
KEY WORDS: Natural deep eutectic solvent, sensory 
properties, rheology, gels, TGA/DSC.
REFERENCES
1. Liu Y, Friensen JB, McAlpine JB, Lankin DC, Chen SN, 
Pauli GF, J Nat Prod, 2018 81(3):679–­690.
2. El Achkar T, Fourmentin S, Greige-­Gerges H, J Mol Liq, 
2019, 88: 111028.
3. Wils L, Leman-­Loubière C, Bellin N, Clément-­Larosière 
B, Pinault M, Chevalier S, Enguehard-­Gueiffier C, Bodet 
C, Boudesocque-­Delaye L, Algal Res 2021, 56: 102317.
TAILORING EMULSIONS WITH UNCRACKED 
VEGETAL BY-­PRODUCTS –­ A CLEAN-­LABEL 
APPROACH
C. Hollestelle1; M. Masson1; D. Blumenthal1; C. Michon1; 
N. Fayolle2; D. Huc-­Mathis1,*
1Université Paris-­Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, UMR 
SayFood, 91120 Palaiseau, France; 2JRS, les tanneries 
Royales, 20 quater rue schnapper, 78100 Saint Germain en 
Laye, France
OBJECTIVE: Up-­cycled ingredients are rising high inter-
ests in order to improve the sustainability of cosmetic for-
mula and promote circular economy. However, a strong 
paradigm remains: biomass valorisation equals extraction 
of high-­value molecules. The present work investigates an 
alternative, avoiding the creation of by-­products from by-­
products, using solvents or more process steps.
METHODS: 
A 
combination 
of 
physico-­chemistry 
and sensory tests was performed in order to describe 
instrumental characteristics and sensory perceptions in 
order to assess the structure–­function relationships of 
surfactant-­free emulsions only stabilized by uncracked 
apple pomace powder.
FIGURE 1: Valorizing uncracked by-­products in clean-­
label cosmetic emulsions from formulation to perceptions.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 47 ===
|  47
ABSTR​ACT
RESULTS: A wide product space was explored based on 
3 natural ingredients: vegetal oil (sunflower or rapeseed), 
water and non-­fractionated apple pomace powder. The ob-
tained textures covered from fluid and sprayable to rich and 
gelled emulsions, while maintaining physical stability for 
at least 1 month at ambient temperature. A full instrumen-
tal characterization was carried out and revealed how the 
soluble elements and the solid particles from apple pomace 
were structuring the emulsions with complementary ac-
tions. Various proofs of concept (PoC) were obtained and 
a reference galenic (rich cream) was benchmarked with 
commercial skincare references. Sorting tests were carried 
out, in order to identify a relevant product space, aiming 
for understanding why and how the clean-­label emulsions 
could be different from classical counterparts.
CONCLUSION: A toolbox for designing clean-­label 
emulsions from vegetal by-­products as meta-­ ingredients 
was created. Emulsions were designed within a wide 
product space from 5 to 80% of oil, without surfactant. The 
sensory perceptions are also investigated in order to im-
plement further the theorical knowledge towards higher 
technological readiness levels (TRLs).
KEY WORDS: up-­cycling, emulsions, formulation, con-
sumer evaluation, clean-­label
SUPRAMOLECULAR CARBOHYDRATE-­BASED 
GELS FROM A GREEN CHEMISTRY APPROACH
S. Halila1,*; R. Brahmi2; S. Yao1
1Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CERMAV, F-­38000 
Grenoble, France; 2second affiliation with address, 
country
(Bio)macromolecular gels are definitively of great interest 
for their ever-­expanding applications across scientific dis-
ciplines from advanced materials to food processing and 
biomedicine. Increasingly, supramolecular gels have been 
considered as an unique emerging type of soft matter for 
exploring various (bio)applications. Supramolecular hydro-
gels are based on low molecular weight gelators (LMWGs) 
that self-­assemble into hierarchical nanostructures through 
non-­covalent interactions of two or more functional groups, 
creating a three-­dimensional (3D) entangled network in 
water.[1] Usually, the self-­assembly of gelator molecules 
occurs through H-­bonding and π-­π stacking, van der Waals 
interactions, coordination interaction etc.
Carbohydrate-­based gelators are of first interest since 
carbohydrates are biosourced, abundant, renewable, bio-
degradable and non-­toxic, filling the criteria of “green” in-
dustry. Carbohydrates not only act as hydrophilic groups 
but also contain multiple hydroxyl groups that serve 
as hydrogen-­bonding sites involved in the 3D-­network 
formation. Moreover, carbohydrates play essential roles 
in life processes, through specific molecular assembly and 
recognition with carbohydrate-­binding proteins, such as 
cell adhesion, cancer metastasis, immune-­system activa-
tion and so on.
In this communication, we will present our recent works 
related to the development of a new synthetic strategy 
to site-­selectively modify the reducing end position of 
carbohydrates and how the molecular design can generate 
various glyco-­nanostructures leading to supramolecular 
carbohydrate-­based gels with specific properties.[2] 
Depending on the chemical glyco-­structures, fatty phases 
as well as water have been successfully jellified and 
applications for cosmetic are envisioned.
Synthesis and Hierachical Self-­assembly of Carbohydrate-­
Based Gelators Towards Supramolecular Gels.
KEY WORDS: Carbohydrate chemistr y, Glycoamphiphiles, 
Self-­Assembly, Supramolecular Gels.
PROMISING EMULSIFYING PROPERTIES OF 
BIO-­SOURCED AMPHIPHILIC XANTHAN 
OBTAINED UNDER GREEN CONDITIONS
M. A. Dib*; E. Gore; M. Grisel
Normandie univ, UNILEHAVRE, FR 3038 CNRS, 
URCOM, 25 rue Philippe Lebon, BP 1123, 76063 Le Havre 
cedex, France
OBJECTIVE: Among others, amphiphilic modified poly-
saccharides represent one of the green solutions to replace 
conventional surfactants [1], the latter being controversial 
because of their harmful toxicological and environmental 
impacts [2]. The enthusiasm for the exploitation of poly-
saccharides is explained by several advantages including 
availability, biodegradability, non-­toxicity and low cost 
[3]; another advantage is their potential for chemical mod-
ification which allows them to acquire outstanding phys-
icochemical properties. In the present project, xanthan 
polysaccharide was hydrophobically modified following 
the principles of green chemistry in order to enhance its 
interfacial properties in addition to its remarkable inher-
ent thickening and viscosifying capacities.
METHODS: A series of xanthan derivatives was first pre-
pared through green esterification using alkenyl succinic 
anhydrides varying from alkyl chain length as grafting 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 48 ===
48  |     
​ABS​TRACT
agents [4]; then corresponding emulsification potential 
was investigated by preparing oil-­in-­water emulsions 
without adding any conventional surfactant. A complete 
approach for studying the dispersions stability was car-
ried out at different scales: (a) macroscopic level through 
visual observation, (b) microscopic scale by optical mi-
croscopy and droplet size distribution and (c) deep micro-
structure stability monitoring over time by Static Multiple 
Light Scattering.
RESULTS: Results allowed evidencing that amphiphilic 
xanthan (AXE) owns high emulsifying potential when 
compared to pristine xanthan (PX), this later being known 
for its poor interfacial properties as a non-­absorbing poly-
mer [5]. In addition, the mechanisms responsible for AXE 
based emulsions stabilization and destabilization were in-
vestigated thus allowing evidencing the effects of both the 
grafting rate and alkyl chain length.
CONCLUSION: This work clearly demonstrates the 
promising and effective emulsifying capacities for such 
new-­brand bio-­sourced amphiphilic xanthan to get 
stable oil-­in-­water emulsions of promising potential for 
industrial applications.
Amphiphilic xanthan stabilizing Oil-­in-­Water emulsions.
KEY WORDS: Xanthan polymer, Green modification, 
Amphiphilic polysaccharide, Emulsifying properties
1. Landoll L. M., Journal of Polymer Science: Polymer 
Chemistry Edition 1982, 20, 443–­455.
2. Olkowska E., Polkowska Ż. and Namieśnik J., Chemical 
Reviews, 2011, 111, 5667–­5700.
3. Barclay T. G., Day C. M., Petrovsky N. and Garg S., 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 2019, 221, 94–­112.
4. Abou Dib M., Hucher N., Gore E., and Grisel M., 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 2022, 291, 119548.
5. Tempio J. S. and Zatz, J. L., Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, 1981, 70, 554–­558.
MULTIPOTENTIAL FEATURES OF A NEW 
NATURAL ENCAPSULATION TECHNOLOGY 
BASED ON MODIFIED QUINOA STARCH
L. Mousnier1,*; A. Manière1; M. Sjöö2; L. Clavel1; 
A. Hentzien1; J. Attia3
1R&D, IFF-­ LUCAS MEYER COSMETICS, Massy, France; 
2Speximo AB, Medicon Village, 223 81 Lund, Sweden; 
3R&D, IFF-­ LUCAS MEYER COSMETICS, Toulouse, 
France
OBJECTIVES: Encapsulation technologies for personal 
care face many technical challenges: microplastic-­free ma-
terials use, effective protection and release performance, a 
cost-­effective scaling process, and limited impact on the 
aesthetics and sensoriality of formulations.
Pickering emulsifiers based on modified quinoa starch 
particles offer an innovative encapsulation system that ad-
dresses these challenges. With further emulsion process-
ing, the starch particles coating seals to encapsulate an 
infinity of lipophilic active substances. The multipotential 
characteristics of these natural and easy-­to-­process core-­
shell microcapsules were presented in this study.
METHODS: The barrier protection effect of thermal 
treatment was assessed at different conditions of time 
and temperature by measuring encapsulation efficiency 
and retention with UV–­Visible spectroscopy. Sensitive 
molecules protection such as unsaturated fatty acids or 
antioxidants was evaluated with dioxygen pressure moni-
toring or by HPLC chemical monitoring on samples placed 
under sunlight or temperature, versus different controls: 
oily and emulsion forms. Finally, an expert panel assessed 
the sensory profile of encapsulated emollients against free 
equivalents dispersed into a cosmetic emulsion.
RESULTS:
Protection: Effective encapsulation and retention can be 
achieved by controlling the swelling time and tempera-
ture of the starch grains. Induction times measurements 
under dioxygen pressure showed that the encapsulated li-
noleic acid was significantly more stable than the control 
oil or emulsion. When microcapsule suspension was com-
pared to an equivalent oil solution, retinyl palmitate integ-
rity was better preserved after 30D over sunlight exposure 
(+14%) while it dropped during storage at 50°C (−34%). 
Another study involving more realistic conditions in an 
oil-­in-­water cosmetic emulsion showed that encapsulated 
ubiquinone stability at 50°C was maintained compared to 
free form (+21%).
Skin Feel: Sensory analyses demonstrated significant im-
pacts of encapsulation on certain sensory attributes: en-
capsulated dry touch emollient was less soapy and softer. 
The titanium dioxide dispersion was felt to be less whit-
ening on application and after 3 minutes. The avocado 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 49 ===
|  49
ABSTR​ACT
oil was also felt less greasy (−26%) and more penetrating 
(+21%).
CONCLUSION: Based on Pickering technology, its 
multipotential features and scalable process, the quinoa 
starch exceeds the new market needs for personal care en-
capsulation systems by showing effective encapsulations 
and retention, protection of sensitive molecules and over-
all sensoriality of formulations improvement.
KEY WORDS: Quinoa starch, Pickering, Encapsulation, 
Protection, Retinyl palmitate, Sensoriality.
KRYPTOSOME FORMULATION, A NEW 
MICELLAR EMULSION DELIVERY SYSTEM
I. Ramos1,*; B. Sanjuán1
1Ayuna Less is Beauty Research, Bit Beauty S.L., Sant 
Feliu de Llobregat (Barcelona) Spain
OBJECTIVE: Bioavailability stands out among the fac-
tors influencing cosmetic effectiveness, which is why 
delivery systems (DS) have been incorporated into formu-
lations for decades. First represented by liposomes, this 
promising solution has drawbacks as it is integrated into 
formulas, limiting its effectiveness: the DS is alien to the 
molecular structure of the cosmetic, destabilizing it, and 
the ultimate dilution of the active ingredient makes effec-
tive dosage complex.
The novelty of the Kryptosome formulation is that the cos-
metic product is an undiluted 100% pure release system 
with no destabilizing agents. In its unique design, phos-
pholipids (P) act simultaneously as emulsifiers and a lipid 
phase, forming a cell-­like multimicellar W/P/W emulsion. 
All the components can penetrate, mimicking and moving 
through the skin structures, gradually releasing the active 
ingredients faster and deeper, where they are needed.
METHODS: Percutaneous absorption study of three for-
mulations containing 1% caffeine: a. water solution (WS, 
control); b. 10% liposome suspension in water (LS); c. 
Kryptosome formulation (KF).
Franz Cells containing dermatomised human skin (n = 3) 
with 24-­hour monitoring of the receptor fluid and finali-
zation of the compartments: skin wash, donor chamber, 
epidermis, dermis and receptor fluid. Quantification of 
caffeine by UPLC/MS/MS.
RESULTS: KF boosts the dermal absorption rate relative 
to WS and LS, x3 and x1.5, respectively. Once the epider-
mis is reached, it acts as an active ingredient reservoir 
facilitating diffusion to the other compartments. KF in-
creases penetration x2.5 and x2 compared to WS and LS, 
respectively.
The increased bioavailability of KF compared to LS could 
be explained by the stability of the phospholipid structures, 
which are present in a higher proportion relative to the ac-
tive ingredient in KF than in LS, and the inclusion of lipid 
bilayer fluidising agents, which would produce a synergis-
tic mechanism between its components and the skin.
CONCLUSION: The Kryptosome formula offers a new 
way of enhancing cosmetic effectiveness in which phos-
pholipids play a key role, turning the delivery system into 
an innovative micellar emulsion that is both sensory and 
texturally surprising.
KEY WORDS: Kryptosome formulation, multimicellar 
emulsion, liposome, delivery system, caffeine
COSMETIC PRODUCTS FOR ATOPIC 
DERMATITIS WITH NATURAL MINERAL 
WATER FROM TERMAS DE SÃO PEDRO DO SUL
A. R. Gama1,2,*; R. Andrade3; A. Jorge4; L. Gonçalves4; 
M. A. Campos4,5,6; A. Palmeira-­de-­Oliveira1,2,7; 
P. Duarte3; R. Palmeira-­de-­Oliveira1,2,7
1Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Beira Interior, 
Covilhã, Portugal; 2CICS-­UBI health Sciences Research 
Center, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal; 
3NECE -­ Research Centre in Business Sciences, University 
of Beira Interior, Estr. Do Sineiro 566 200–­209 Covilhã; 
4Termalistur –­ Termas de São Pedro do Sul, E.M., S.A., 
São Pedro do Sul, Portugal; 5Instituto de Investigação 
e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal; 6Escola de medicina, Universidade do Minho, 
Braga, Portugal; 7Labfit-­HPRD health products Research 
and Development, Lda, Covilhã, Portugal
Objective: Atopic dermatitis (AD) refers to the cutaneous 
and recurrent inflammatory manifestations associated 
with atopy. AD therapy aims to control symptoms, which 
includes the use of adjuvant products that promote skin 
hydration and improve its protective barrier function.
Bioactive properties of thermal waters have motivated 
their use in the prevention and treatment of various skin 
conditions.
The current work reports the rational design, stability, 
and potential user evaluation of three innovative cosmetic 
products (a cleansing stick, a supplemented thermal water 
spray and a moisture lotion) for Atopic Dermatitis man-
agement using São Pedro do Sul thermal water as the core 
ingredient.
Methods: The products were developed considering a 
benchmarking and the principles of minimalism, envi-
ronmental sustainability, ease of use, absence of perfume 
(to avoid irritancy), innovation, efficacy, and protection of 
the skin's microbiome to maintain its barrier properties.
Cosmetics stability was evaluated through centrifuge test 
(3000 rpm, 30 min), cycle test (4°C and 40°C, 4 weeks), 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 50 ===
50  |     
​ABS​TRACT
accelerated stability (room temperature, 5°C, 40°C and 
light) and by monitoring the organoleptic characteristics 
over time. Three focus groups with 25 individuals were 
performed to assess potential users' perceptions regarding 
the portfolio of products.
Results: We developed a moisturizer lotion with a soft 
emollient composition with an advanced texture in a spray 
format, a thermal water supplemented with hydrating in-
gredients with a soothing and refreshing action, and a stick 
with mild surfactants for gentle, hydrating cleansing ac-
tion. The supplemented thermal water and the moisturizer 
were stable to centrifugation. All products showed a posi-
tive performance in the cycle testing and maintained their 
organoleptic characteristics throughout. The cleansing 
stick performs well in accelerated stability. The results of 
the focus groups reveal mixed evaluations. The participants 
liked the idea of using thermal water as the core ingredient 
concept of the products. The most appreciated product was 
the moisture lotion, while the cleansing stick was the less.
Conclusion: The rational design of a cleansing stick, a 
supplemented thermal water spray and a moisture lotion 
with Sao Pedro do Sul Thermal Water for atopic derma-
titis was successfully achieved. Stability testing support 
further in vivo testing of these products.
Keywords: atopic dermatitis; cosmetics; focus group; 
thermal water; stability
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by 
“AqvaTOPIC –­ Desenvolvimento de gama de produtos 
cosméticos com água mineral natural das Termas de S. 
Pedro do Sul, vocacionados para a dermatite atópica” I&DT 
Project financially supported by Portugal 2020 Program (PT 
2020) through the Competitiveness and Internationalization 
Operational Program (POCI) and by the European Union 
through the European Regional Development Fund 
(FEDER), with the code. POCI-­01-­0247-­FEDER-­070908. 
This work was developed within the scope of the CICS-­UBI 
projects UIDB/00709/2020 and UIDP/00709/2020, financed 
by national funds through the Portuguese Foundation for 
Science and Technology/MCTES.
PLANT POLYPHENOLIC EXTRACT FROM 
BERKEM BIOSOLUTIONS® FOR ANTIMICROBIAL 
PROTECTION OF COSMETIC PRODUCTS
D.Messaoudi1,*; S. Lafay1; A. Robert1; J.P. Joseleau1,2; 
K. Ruel1,2
1Groupe Berkem, R&D Laboratories, 20 rue Jean Duvert, 
Lanquefort 33290B, France; 2Link Conseils -­ 349 rue du 
Mont-­Blanc, Le Cheylas 38570, France
Polyphenolic extract from Berkem Biosolutions® is a natu-
ral plant polyphenolic extract that is being developed by 
Groupe Berkem, R&D Laboratories as a preservative for 
several applications including antimicrobial protection 
of cosmetic products. Here, it has been formulated in a 
water-­soluble cream product which has been assayed ac-
cording to a preservation efficacy test.
Assays against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Escherichia coli, Aspergillus brasiliensis and 
Candida albicans were conducted using ISO 11930, 2019 
standard method. White water-­based creams formu-
lated with a range of 1% to 6% w/w of Plant Polyphenolic 
Extract from Berkem Biosolutions® were used for the 
experiments.
The assays showed that polyphenol-­enriched formula-
tions showed higher inhibitory activity against bacteria 
and yeast at all concentrations than moulds. For all tested 
creams, the weakest antimicrobial activity was demon-
strated against C. albicans. Protection against C. albicans 
is achieved at higher concentrations.
Summarizing, Plant Polyphenolic Extract from Berkem 
Biosolutions® added to cosmetic formula at an appropri-
ate concentration (from 4% to 6%) inhibits the growth of 
microorganisms for antimicrobial protection of cosmetic 
products. Therefore, it can be recommended as effective 
candidate for natural cosmetic preservatives and for re-
placing synthetic preservatives as methylparaben giving a 
guarantee of microbiological purity of the cosmetic prod-
uct under its use and storage.
Keywords: preservative, ISO 11930, plant polyphenolic 
extract, antimicrobial protection, polyphenol formulation.
References: Abreu A C, McBain A J, Simões M (2012). 
Plants as sources of new antimicrobials and resistance-­
modifying agents. Nat. Prod. Rep. 29: 1007–­1021. doi: 
10.1039/c2np20035j
ISO 11930, Cosmetics -­ Microbiology -­ Evaluation of the 
antimicrobial protection of a cosmetic product.
Siegert (2012) -­ ISO 11930 –­ A Comparison to other 
Methods to Evaluate the Efficacy of Antimicrobial 
Preservation.
INNOVATIVE MULTIFUNCTIONAL MINERAL 
FILTERS: PROTECTION FROM ULTRAVIOLET, 
VISIBLE AND INFRARED RADIATION AND 
COLOUR
B. Motos-­Pérez1,*; F. Olechowski2
1Advanced Dispersed Particles S.L., Calle Oro No. 45-­nave 
14, Colmenar Viejo 28 770, Spain; 2Connect Chemicals 
France S.A.R.L. 79 Rue du Faubourg Poissonnière, Paris 
75 009, France
Objective: The solar radiation involves three components 
UV, Vis and IR light whose wavelength and energy 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 51 ===
|  51
ABSTR​ACT
influence their depth of penetration and potential health 
damage. Besides typical mineral UV-­filters titanium and 
zinc oxide; iron oxides used to obtain tinted formulation 
may block HEV light and suppress Vis-­light induced 
hyper-­pigmentation specially in dark phototypes of 
skins. [1,2] Increasing the number of ingredients can 
hinder formulations development, so multifunctional 
ingredients are needed to achieve simpler, cheaper, and 
more sustainable formulas.
Methods: Two ranges of cosmetic ingredients mainly 
composed by titanium dioxide and including iron oxides 
(CI-­77492, CI-­77491, CI-­77499) and silica are evaluated. 
The ingredients were produced by patented method for 
the dry dispersion of nanoparticles which results in the 
production of composites with hierarchical structures. 
They are called enhance U mineral UV-­filters and effec-
tive U pigments supplied by ADP Cosmetics, distributed 
by Connect Chemicals. The absorbance properties in UV, 
Vis and near-­IR regions were analysed with a Shimadzu 
UV-­2600i UV–­Vis spectrophotometer with integrating 
sphere from 220 to 1200 nm.
Results: The products are micrometric but with the 
properties of nanoparticles (better dispersion/protection, 
transparency at application on skin…). The area under the 
absorbance curve for these titanium dioxide-­based filters 
and their protection properties from UVA (320–­400 nm) 
and Vis-­radiation (from 380 to 700 nm) increase with the 
iron oxides content. Remarkable absorption of blue-­light 
BL (380–­500 nm) and in the near-­IR region (from 700 nm) 
was found.
The titanium dioxide-­based pigments present important 
UV radiation protection properties dependent on iron ox-
ides content. effectiveU-­T-­red shows remarkable absorb-
ance in Vis and IR-­regions (mainly in blue light). Effective 
U-­T-­black stands out for its absorbance of Vis-­light from 
570 and of IR (from 700 nm and probably after 1200 nm). 
This was also observed with filters that contain CI-­7499 
pigment in their composition.
Conclusion: The mineral enhanceU filters and effectiveU 
pigments show unusual protective properties from UV–­
Vis-­IR radiation in one single ingredient explained by out-
standing combination of chemical composition (titanium 
dioxide and iron oxides), balance particle size (>100 nm) 
and unique physical structure. As a result, these COSMOS 
ingredients are offering better performances with lower 
ecotoxicology profile at reduced price compared to today 
highly criticized nanoparticles.
Keywords: lower ecotoxicology, innovative patented pro-
cess engineering, mineral UV filters; multifunctionality; 
multifunctional UV protection; reef friendly sunscreen-
References:[1] Bernstein EF, Sarkas HW, Boland P. J 
Cosmet Dermatol. 2021, 20:532–­537.
[2] Lyons AB, Trullas C, Kohli I, Hamzavi IH, Lim HW. J 
Am Acad Dermatol 2021,84:1393–­1397.
GRAFTED LIPID STRUCTURES AS CARRIERS 
OF SELECTED PHYTOCHEMICAL COMPOUNDS 
WITH POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC EFFECT IN 
THE TREATMENT OF SKIN DISORDERS
E. Lasoń*; K. Lipiec
Department of Chemical Engineering and Technology, 
Cracow University of Technology, Warszawska 24, 
Cracow, Poland
Objective: The aim of the study was to obtain stable sys-
tems of lipid nanostructures grafted with hyaluronic acid 
(HA-­NLC) as carriers of selected compounds of natural 
origin (curcumin, naringenin, ursolic acid) with potential 
activity for skin disorders including cancer.
Methods: Nanostructured lipid carriers (NLC) were ob-
tained by ultrasonification technique, and surface modi-
fication with hyaluronic acid was made by electrostatic 
attraction. The systems stability was assessed by micro-
scopic observation and viscosity measurements. The av-
erage particle size and polydispersity index (PDI) ware 
measured by means of dynamic light scattering (DLS). In 
vitro release studies of actives were performed at the 32°C, 
using cellulose membrane and the mixture of PBS/etha-
nol as a receptor solution.
Results: The obtained dispersions of nanostructured lipid 
carriers grafted with hyaluronic acid were time-­stable sys-
tems. Ursolic acid and naringenin were selected as thera-
peutic active substances in the treatment of skin disorders 
(ex. skin cancer) and then incorporated into the HA-­NLC 
lipid core consisting of candelilla wax and black currant 
oil. HA-­modified nanostructured lipid carriers loaded 
with active substances were compared with reference 
systems without surface modification (NLC) in order to 
confirm the beneficial effect of hyaluronic acid modifica-
tion on the stability of the dispersions obtained and the 
prolonged release of active substances.
Conclusion: The obtained results confirm the potential 
of hyaluronic acid-­modified lipid carriers as a transdermal 
delivery system of ursolic acid or naringenin in the pre-
vention of skin diseases.
Keywords: hyaluronic acid, nanostructured lipid carri-
ers, phytochemicals, skin problems, skin cancer
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 52 ===
52  |     
​ABS​TRACT
BIO-­MASK TO SOOTHE AND REGENERATE 
DAMAGED SKIN
M. Miastkowska1,*; K. Bialik Wąs1; A. Kulawik-­Pióro1; 
A. Sienkiewicz1; K. Malarz2; A. Mrozek-­Wilczkiewicz2; 
M. Barczewski3
1Department of Chemical Engineering and Technology, 
Cracow University of Technology, Warszawska 24, Cracow 
31–­155, Poland; 2University of Silesia in Katowice, Faculty 
of Science and Technology, A. Chelkowski Institute of 
Physics, 75 Pułku Piechoty 1A, Chorzow 41–­500, Poland; 
3Institute of Materials Technology, Faculty of Mechanical 
Engineering and Management, Poznan University of 
Technology, 24 Jana Pawła II St., Poznan 60 965, Poland
Objective: The skin after laser therapy is swollen and red, 
therefore it is advisable to use cooling compresses and 
creams to support skin regeneration. To meet these expec-
tations, the aim of our research was to develop an innova-
tive formula, rich in active ingredients, based on hydrogel 
matrix enriched by a lipid nanodispersion.
Methods: First an optimal composition of the nanoe-
mulsion and hydrogel matrix was developed using the 
statistical method of design of the experiment (DOE).
The composition and production method of the bio-­
mask have been covered by patent protection (P. 440805). 
Subsequently, the porous structure and elasticity of the 
bio-­mask were analysed (texture tests, bioadhesion, phys-
icochemical analysis, mechanical properties, SEM, FTIR, 
TGA/DSC). To confirm the effectiveness of the mask as 
a carrier of active ingredients “release test” in diffusion 
chambers was carried out. Then, apparatus tests of the 
skin after application of the preparation were conducted 
(moisture level, TEWL, erythema, elasticity and sensitiv-
ity). In addition, the regenerative properties of the mask 
and its components have been confirmed in vitro studies 
(cytotoxicity, studies on the inhibition of the glycation 
process of elastin and collagen).
Results: The obtained results showed that the struc-
ture of the product in the form of a bio-­hydrogel mask is 
highly porous. The release test showned that the maxi-
mum release of active substances occurs after 45 min. 
Instrumental tests proved that after 60 min of application, 
the bio-­mask increased skin hydration by approx. 90%, 
reduced TEWL by approx. 28%, reduced erythema by ap-
prox. 9%, increased skin elasticity by approx. 89% and re-
duced its sensitivity by about 27%. In vitro tests confirmed 
a positive effect of bio-­mask to inhibit the glycation of col-
lagen and elastin, which has a significant impact on main-
taining the structural, elastic, and functional integrity of 
the skin.
Conclusion: As a result of the research, a bio-­mask con-
taining 100% ingredients of natural origin was obtained. 
Its effectiveness as a carrier of active ingredients as well as 
moisturizing and regenerating properties of the skin have 
been confirmed, which has been proven by both instru-
mental and biological tests.
Keywords: bio-­mask, cosmetic formulation, hydration, 
hydrogel, lipid nanodispersion, regeneration
LIPASE CATALYZED SELECTIVE PRODUCTION 
OF ISOPROPYL AND LIGNIN DERIVED 
LIPOPHILIC ANTIOXIDANTS ESTERS
Y. Satyawali*; M. Martinez-­Garcia; W. van Hecke; 
W. Dejonghe
Separation and Conversion Technology, Flemish Institute 
for Technological Research (VITO), Boeretang 200, Mol 
2400, Belgium
Esters are used in cosmetics industries for all classes of 
products such as skin, hair care, toiletries, colour cosmet-
ics and fragrances. Esters are currently synthesized chem-
ically using metal oxides, acids, or bases as catalyst at high 
temperature. Enzyme (e.g., lipase) catalysed esterification 
reactions present a greener route and have several advan-
tages especially in terms of milder reaction temperature, 
better product quality etc. These advantages have been 
recognized by the industries and a few commercial en-
zymatically produced esters are available in the market. 
However, these products are exceptions rather than the 
norm. More specifically, short chain alcohol esters e.g. 
isopropyl esters are not produced enzymatically on a com-
mercial scale, to the best of our knowledge. In this work, 
we will present results of lipase catalysed process for syn-
thesis of isopropyl esters (e.g. isopropyl palmitateand iso-
propyl laurate) and antioxidant esters.
As in all esterification reactions, water removal is also 
needed during synthesis of isopropylesters, however, in 
this case, water removal is complicated as isopropanol 
and water form an azeotropic mixture. For such cases, hy-
drophilic pervaporation is an alluring technology as it al-
lows to get past the azeotrope. Hence, this is the first study 
demonstrating the lipase catalysed solvent free synthesis 
of isopropyl esters with coupled pervaporation for water 
removal. Furthermore, a model was established for this 
integrated process. This“digital twin” allows to study the 
effect of key operational parameters (pervaporation sur-
face, enzyme loading) on productivity, catalyst productiv-
ity and residence time to convert 99% of the fatty acid.
Next to isopropylesters, results of enzymatic synthesis of 
antioxidant esters (based on lignin) will alsobe shared. 
Ligninde polymerization products have enormous poten-
tial as antioxidant additives, but they need to be lipophi-
lized for application in hydrophobic product matrixes. 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 53 ===
|  53
ABSTR​ACT
We conducted selective esterification of a fatty acid to the 
aliphatic OH of the monolignol dihydroconiferyl alcohol 
using lipases, without modifying the phenolic group. The 
esterified monolignol showed relevant long-­term radical 
scavenging activity, comparable to other petroleum-­based 
antioxidants. Various lignin fractions were also used as for 
enzymatic esterification with different fatty acids, result-
ing in esterification degrees of 20%–­58% (of total aliphatic 
OH).
Keywords: antioxidant esters, enzymatic process, esters, 
lipase, membrane, pervaporation
INNOVATIVE PROCESSES FOR NATURAL 
ACTIVE INGREDIENTS EXTRACTION AND 
THEIR ONLINE FUNCT​ION​ALI​ZAT​ION USING 
FLOW CHEMISTRY TECHNOLOGY
F. Caré1,*; D. Sangare2; S. Bostyn2; S. Routier1; P. Lafite1; 
F. Buron1
1Institut de Chimie Organique et Analytique (ICOA), 
Université d'Orléans, UMR CNRS 7311, Rue de Chartres, 
BP 6759, Orléans 45 067, France; 2Institut de Combustion, 
Aérothermique, Réactivité et Environnement (ICARE), 
1c Avenue de la Recherche Scientifique, Orléans Cedex 2 
45 071, France
Natural products extracted from biomass are an abun-
dant source of bioactive compounds with high potential 
for cosmetic applications. Flavonoids compounds, for ex-
ample, are frequently found in fruits, plants or wood, and 
offer antioxidant, anti-­inflammatory or anti-­allergic effect 
[1]. Yet, flavonoids often suffer from their lack of stability 
or solubility to be properly valued as active ingredients [2].
To overcome those limitations and offer environment-­
friendly cosmetic applications, flow chemistry has risen 
as agreen technology for innovative process alternatives. 
Its many advantages include enhanced heat and mass 
transfer, providing faster, safer, more efficient and reliable 
reactions, as well as their easy scale up [3]. Its seamless 
implementation also facilitates coupling to further func-
tionalization or online analysis.
In this context, our interest has been focused on the 
development of an original integrated process includ-
ing biomass flow extraction of cosmetic ingredients and 
their online functionalization in order to enhance their 
properties.
To elaborate a proof of concept, we implemented the 
online extraction and functionalization of Robinia 
Pseudoacacia wood, an abundant tree which embodies a 
valuable biomass source of flavonoids. This implemen-
tation was supported by Computational Fluid Dynamics 
(CFD) modelization in order to optimize flow extraction 
parameters, to retrieve up to 90% of Robinia wood valu-
able extractives.
The continuous extraction cell was further coupled to 
various types of functionalization. Innovative new in-
gredients have been produced from this modular online 
process, embedded in an industrializable and responsible 
approach. This work provides a transferrable methodol-
ogy of online extraction/structural modification to other 
biomass and extractible bioactive molecules.
Keywords: extraction, flow chemistry, natural products, 
online process
Reference: [1] Kanthasamy and al., Nutraceuticals, 2016, 
447–­452; [2] Ghoul and al., J. Agric. Food Chem., 2007, 55, 
9496–­9502; [3] Kappe and al., Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 23, 
6688–­6728.
APPLICATION OF SELECTIVE SUPERCRITICAL 
FLUID EXTRACTION (SSFE) ON NATURAL 
PLANT COMPOUNDS FOR COSMETIC 
APPLICATIONS
S. Atwi-­Ghaddar*; E. Destandau; E. Lesellier
Institute of Organic and Analytical Chemistry (ICOA), 
Chartres Street, Orleans-­France
The plant world is rich in valuable natural molecules. 
Today, many consumers are exploring daily use products 
that are more natural, which created a need to be filled by 
the cosmetic industry. This tendency included an ecologi-
cal shift for natural plant extracts obtained with a low en-
vironmental impact process, to integrate them in the final 
cosmetic formulation.
In this context, the use of “green” solvents like supercriti-
cal carbon dioxide (SC-­CO2) became essential. The process 
of using SC-­CO2 for extraction is known as supercritical 
fluid extraction (SFE). SC-­CO2 offers many advantages: it 
is non-­toxic, low-­cost and its evaporation after extraction 
Scheme of the biomass extraction-­functionalization 
process.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 54 ===
54  |     
​ABS​TRACT
favours the concentration of extracts. Furthermore, its 
low polarity offers the possibility of replacing traditional 
non-­polar solvent like hexane. As part of the PIERIC pro-
ject, we explore use of supercritical fluids and especially 
their application in the extraction of natural bioactive 
compounds from plants.
To optimize the numerous parameters acting in SFE, pres-
sure, temperature, percentage, and nature of polar modi-
fier, the use of experimental design like response surface 
methodology (RSM), allows modelling and optimizing of 
the response, while decreasing the number of experimen-
tal points.
In this research framework, we elaborated a Box–­Behnken 
design (BBD), with three factors, three levels and 17 ex-
perimental points. This strategy was used to investigate 
the extraction of molecules on both extremes of the polar-
ity spectrum. From non-­polar compounds like triterpene 
esters Faradiol (Log P ≈ 15) of Calendula officinalis L flow-
ers, to polar or highly polar compounds like punicalagins 
(Log P = 1.7), ellagic acid (Log P = 1.1) from Punica grana-
tum pericarp or Epigallocatechin gallate (Log P = 1.2) and 
caffeine (Log P = −0.1) from Camellia sinensis leaves.
In conclusion, the application of experimental designs 
allowed an effective SFE optimization to recover com-
pounds of various polarity from plants. The BBD could be 
considered as a generic tool for a fast and efficient SC-­CO2 
extraction. Consequently, offering in some cases a higher 
yield of compounds while using less solvent than tradi-
tional extraction methods (i.e. solid–­liquid extraction).
Acknowledgments: This work (PIERIC: integrated 
processes of eco-­extraction for bioactive compounds 
from plants) is financed by the Centre-­Val de Loire re-
gion (France) within the framework of the ARD CVL 
Cosmetosciences program (2020–­2023).
HYGIENE PRODUCTS FOR PETS: INNOVATIVE 
APPROACHES USING THE HUMAN COSMETICS' 
EXPERIENCE
A. Palmeira de Oliveira1,2,*; C. A. Santos1; D. Esteves1; 
G. França1; G. L. da Silva3; A. T. de Aragão3; 
R. Palmeira de Oliveira1,2
1Labfit –­ HPRD Lda, Edifício UBIMEDICAL, Covilhã, 
Portugal; 2CICS-­UBI, Avenida infante D Henrique, 
Covilhã, Portugal; 3Thermalvet Lda, Termas de 
Monfortinho, Idanha-­a-­Nova, Portugal
Objective: The objective of this R&D project was to de-
velop hygiene products for pets, using the experience and 
knowledge created with human cosmetics products, sup-
porting the creative process in trends like natural ingredi-
ents and environmentally friendly production.
Methods: The development process began with the evalu-
ation of benchmark products, targeted for pets, in order to 
evaluate the type of ingredients usually selected, the package, 
the content net and claims. An approach similar to “quality 
by design” was used, assuring efficacy and safety while con-
sidering the price target for each product. The safety of the 
products was evaluated in a double approach: considering 
both the pets and owners. For this, a safety evaluation model 
for veterinary products was proposed based on the margin of 
safety (MoS) calculation used for human cosmetic products, 
including adaptations based on pets particular characteris-
tics (weight and area of exposure) and considering the worst-­
case scenario of product exposure (pet vs owner). Product 
safety was further evaluated by the performance of in vitro 
skin irritation tests using reconstructed human epidermis 
(RHE) and in vitro eye irritation test (HET-­CAM).
Results: Seven products were developed: three sham-
poos, one conditioner, two wet wipes and one ear solution. 
The benchmark process evidenced that the most common 
used ingredients in hygiene products for pets are simi-
lar to cosmetics for humans. The product development 
was performed selecting functional ingredients, adjust-
ing some aspects, like the pH as human skin is normally 
acidic while pets skin is more alkaline. The project also fo-
cused on sustainability, with natural or naturally derived 
ingredients being prioritized. Different plant extracts were 
used, like Cistus ladanifer extract, an endemic Portuguese 
plant. A minimalist approach was also adopted exclud-
ing unnecessary ingredients. The majority of the products 
were produced using a cold processable method in order 
to lower the energetic impact. The products were all con-
sidered safe with MoS >100 for all the ingredients and re-
sults obtained from both RHE and HET-­CAM supporting 
that safety.
Conclusion: This project allowing the development of 
seven, safe and efficient hygiene products for pets, based 
on trends of the market like natural ingredients, minimal-
ism, safety, environment friend industrial process.
Keywords: pet cosmetics, hygiene products, sustainability
R&D project Thermalvet, number Centro-­01-­0247-­
FEDER-­072639, Centro2020.
CHEMICAL PROFILING OF NATURAL 
INGREDIENTS OBTAINED IN NADES SYSTEMS 
USING THE CARAMEL APPROACH –­ ST. JOHN'S 
WORT AS A CASE STUDY
A. Kotland; J. Thiery; P. Darme; J. Hubert*
NatExplore SAS, Reims, France
Recent trends in the cosmetic industry have focused on 
the development of high-­quality natural ingredients with 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 55 ===
|  55
ABSTR​ACT
targeted activities, while avoiding harmful solvents for 
metabolite extraction. In this context, new-­generation 
green solvent systems such as natural deep eutectic sol-
vents (NADES) are particularly advantageous to produce 
sustainable and safe extracts. In addition to their intrin-
sic properties, such as chemical and thermal stability or 
non-­flammability, most NADES exhibit high extraction 
efficiency, making them ideal for the solubilization of a 
wide range of molecules.
But the chemical profiling of NADES extracts remains 
very difficult because the compounds of interest are highly 
diluted in the NADES matrix which is hardly eliminated 
due to its poor volatility and high viscosity, hampering 
metabolite identification.
Objective: This work aims to demonstrate the great po-
tential of the CARAMEL approach for the chemical profil-
ing of natural extracts obtained in NADES systems using 
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) as a case study.
Methods: Hypericum perforatum aerial parts were ex-
tracted with the common neutral NADES glycerol/water/
fructose (1/1/3, v/v). The resulting extract was prelimi-
narily partitioned in the liquid/liquid solvent system ethyl 
acetate/acetonitrile/water (3/3/4, v/v) and the less polar 
upper phase was further separated by centrifugal parti-
tion chromatography to produce a fraction series of sim-
plified composition. All fractions were submitted to the 
CARAMEL identification process.
Results: A diversity of plant constituents was successfully 
detected by NMR after CPC fractionation and hierarchical 
clustering analysis of the whole spectral dataset allowed 
to visualize the carbon fingerprints of the main chemi-
cal markers. A database containing predicted 13C NMR 
values of natural molecules helped to quickly identify al-
ready known metabolites through dereplication. Rigorous 
interpretation of 1D and 2D NMR data led to validation 
of database proposals and further structural elucidation 
of some 20 metabolites among which glycosylated flavo-
noids, quinic acid derivatives, amino acids, mono-­ and 
disaccharides.
Conclusion: The chemical profiles of active ingredients 
obtained in NADES extracts can be deciphered using the 
CARAMEL analytical strategy.
Keywords: bio-­sourcing, chemical profiling, derepli-
cation, green chemistry, natural deep eutectic solvents 
(nades), naturality
STUDY OF MOISTURIZER CREAM 
CONTAINING A COMBINATION OF PREBIOTIC, 
PARAPROBIOTIC, AND POSTBIOTIC TOWARDS 
SKIN MICROBIOME
N. Istiqomah*; W. Rosmayanti; A. M. Christianti
Paragon Technology and Innovation, Tangerang, 
Indonesia
Objective: Human skin is colonized by a diverse milieu 
of microorganisms, which could benefit the skin if they 
are balanced in amount and variety. The colony can be 
modulated by internal and external factors, including 
application of skin care products. Skin care containing 
microbiome ingredients can give efficacy to the skin, 
but also have potency to influence its microbiota eco-
system. The aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of 
cream containing a combination of prebiotic (Saccharide 
Isomerate), paraprobiotic (Bifida Ferment Lysate), and 
postbiotic (Hyaluronic Acid) towards Cutibacterium 
acnes, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Corynebacterium 
striatum, as 3 main microbiotas in skin.
Methods: The moisturizer cream was evaluated to see 
the effect on skin microbiome balance including S. epider-
midis, C. striatum, and C. acnes on 3D skin cell model with 
culture numbers NCTC 737, NCTC 11047 and NCTC 764 
respectively. Certain amounts of viable bacteria were inoc-
ulated to the cells, contacted with the product, then grown 
in the media to count the number of bacteria after contact. 
Following the incubation, the undernatant was aspirated 
and frozen for quantification of IL-­1α. Haematoxylin and 
Eosin (H&E) staining was used to assess skin cell mor-
phology from all groups including untreated, dPBS con-
trol and treatment with the product.
Results: The moisturizer cream showed no statistically 
significant effect on S. epidermidis and C. striatum com-
pared to untreated control. The product is likely not to 
have a negative impact on these two microorganisms. On 
the other hand, C. acnes was significantly reduced. IL-­
1α released was not statistically significant compared to 
untreated or PBS control. H&E staining showed that the 
product gave no negative effect on skin model morphol-
ogy when compared to Untreated or dPBS controls.
Conclusion: This study proved that moisturizer cream is 
considered as ‘microbiome friendly’ as shown by no statis-
tically significant effect on S. epidermidis and C. striatum, 
and the microbiome diversity is still maintained although 
there is a decrease in C. acnes number. The product is un-
likely to cause substantial irritation over 24-­h contact time 
with the skin model.
Keywords: microbiome, moisturizer, sensitive skin
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 56 ===
56  |     
​ABS​TRACT
COSMETIC PRODUCTS MARKETED FOR ATOPIC 
DERMATITIS IN PORTUGAL: ANALYSIS OF 
CLAIMS AND LABELING
M. Fernandes1,*; A. R. Gama1,2; J. Martinez de Oliveira1,2; 
A. Palmeira de Oliveira1,2,3; R. Palmeira de Oliveira1,2,3
1Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Beira Interior, 
av. infante D. Henrique, Covilhã, Portugal; 2CICS-­UBI 
Health Sciences Research Center, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Beira Interior, av. infante D. 
Henrique, Covilhã, Portugal; 3Labfit-­HPRD health 
products Research and Development, Lda, Edifício 
UBIMEDICAL Estrada Municipal 506, Covilhã 6200–­284, 
Portugal
Objective: Atopic Dermatitis (AD) is a chronic and in-
flammatory skin disease that causes itching, dryness, 
redness, and inflammation. AD therapy aims to control 
symptoms, which includes adjuvant cosmetics products to 
improve skin hydration. A market study was conducted to 
analyse cosmetic products used in the adjuvant treatment 
of atopic dermatitis based on their labeling, formulation, 
and claims according to European regulations.
Methods: Twenty-­six cosmetic products from eight 
brands were analysed and divided into two categories: 13 
cleansing cosmetic products and 13 body care cosmetics. 
The study was divided into two phases to collect informa-
tion, the first focusing on ingredient analysis and labelling 
according to European regulations, and the second on as-
sessing claims on product packaging and domains under 
European regulations, considering market positioning for 
atopic dermatitis.
Results: The main findings of the study reveal that one 
product meets the recommended formulation without 
anionic surfactants (bath oil of Bioderma®). The Uriage® 
cream had the most preservatives. The Aveeno® shower 
gel's claim of being “paraben-­free” making this claim 
derogatory towards a class of preservatives. Two ISDIN® 
products had ingredients with a perfuming function de-
spite claiming to be fragrance-­free. Only seven of the 
products contain moisturizing ingredients with the three 
classes of hydration recommended for treating atopic der-
matitis. Additionally, many creams and balms lack pre-
cautions regarding their use. While some inconsistencies 
were found in relation to certain criteria of regulation, all 
the products analysed allow for a simple and informed 
choice for the adjuvant treatment of atopic dermatitis.
Conclusion: The study highlights a need for simpler and 
clearer European regulations to facilitate interpretation 
and analysis. The presence of inconsistencies between 
product claims and their actual ingredients also calls for 
better regulation and monitoring of product labeling. 
Ultimately, the study provides valuable information for 
individuals with atopic dermatitis looking for cosmetic 
products to mitigate their symptoms.
Keywords: allegations; atopic dermatitis; cosmetic prod-
ucts; European Regulation; INCI; itch; labelling; leave-­in 
cosmetic products; rinsed-­off cosmetic products
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by 
“AqvaTOPIC –­ Desenvolvimento de gama de produtos 
cosméticos com água mineral natural das Termas de S. 
Pedro do Sul, vocacionados para a dermatite atópica” I&DT. 
Project financially supported by Portugal 2020 Program (PT 
2020) through the Competitiveness and. Internationalization 
Operational Program (POCI) and by the European Union 
through the European Regional Development Fund 
(FEDER), with the code POCI-­01-­0247-­FEDER-­070908. 
This work was developed within the scope of the CICS-­UBI 
projects UIDB/00709/2020 and UIDP/00709/2020, financed 
by national funds through the Portuguese Foundation for 
Science and Technology/MCTES.
NANOCOSPHA: INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES 
FOR PERSONAL CARE
B. De Santes*; F. Spena; M. Giustra; L. Morelli; E. Ochoa; 
L. Salvioni; M. Colombo; D. Prosperi
NanoBioLab, Department of Biotechnology and 
Biosciences, University of Milano-­Bicocca, Milan, Italy
NanoCosPha is a new technological platform born in col-
laboration with Regione Lombardia. The main challenge of 
this facility is to become a support for companies covering 
the entire production process, starting from the selection of 
lead compounds, natural or synthetic molecules, to the de-
velopment of pharmaceutical or cosmetics final products.
The main idea of this project is to share our skills and ex-
ploit the academic technologies in service and support of 
cosmetic and pharma companies both at a local and inter-
national level.
This infrastructure includes seven different laboratories, 
mostly related to cosmetic field, focusing on different pro-
jects such as bioprospecting for the extraction and puri-
fication of bioactive molecules from plants, facilities for 
the production and characterization of solid and semisolid 
cosmetic formulation.
To do that, NanoCosPha platform is fully equipped with 
advanced instruments, covering the entire workflow: 
from the extraction and development of green ingredi-
ents to the production and characterization of solid and 
semisolid products and to the validation of activities 
through in vitro and in vivo experiments. Among extrac-
tion methods we have supercritical CO2 in addition to 
conventional methods such as green solvents and spray 
dry. For the compounds characterization we can perform 
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 57 ===
|  57
ABSTR​ACT
FT-­IR and UV–­Vis spectroscopy, electron microscopies 
(SEM and TEM). We produce solid formulations by using 
tablet press and tablet coating pan and characterize them 
with dissolution and disintegration apparatus; emulsifier, 
rheometer, texture analyser and Franz cell are used for the 
production and characterization of semisolid products.
Currently we are working on sustainable compounds de-
riving from natural sources as potential active ingredients 
and excipients for solid and semisolid cosmetic formula-
tions. We are optimizing standard protocols for the exploi-
tation of a customized 3D printer based on binder jetting 
technology for the solid formulations.
In this contest, the aim of NanoCosPha is to act as a unique 
contact for companies, from basic research to the formulation 
of new products. Meanwhile, it provides innovative technolo-
gies and technicians to promote research in cosmetic and 
pharmaceutical field. The over mentioned innovation of this 
platform includes not only the use of advanced instruments 
but also the technologies recently introduced in this field.
Keywords: innovation; multidisciplinary; research; skin 
care; sustainability; technology transfer
USING PLASMA TECHNOLOGY TO 
DECONTAMINATE MICROORGANISMS ON 
SURFACES AND INSIDE LIQUID MEDIUMS
E. Le Toquin1,*; S. Depayras2; N. Picard2; M. Feuilloley1,3; 
N. Orange1,3
1Cosmetomics@normandie, Université de Rouen campus 
d'Evreux 55 Rue Saint Germain, Evreux 2700, France; 
2PRAXENS 55 Rue Saint Germain Evreux 2700, France; 
3Université de Rouen Laboratoire de Microbiologie de 
communication Bactérienne et Stratégies anti-­infectieuses 
55 Rue Saint Germain 2700 Evreux, France
There is a real need to control cosmetic products in regard 
of stability, safety of their formulation and risk of being 
exposed to microbial contamination in order to provide 
responses to companies seeking to preserve microbial 
quality and eliminate synthetic preservatives. This target 
therefore requires the search for new high-­performances 
decontamination equipment applicable to fragile products 
such as cosmetic products and packaging.
In order to respond to these issues, a new generation of 
plasma-­based technology for surfaces and liquid media 
decontamination, 
non-­thermal 
microwave-­generated 
plasma, has been developed within our structure. This 
cold plasma technology, is widely applied in industry but 
not in the field of health safety, despite demonstrated bac-
tericidal activity.
The bactericidal efficiency of the cold plasma technology 
has already been studied and validated in our laboratories 
for decontamination of industrial rinsing water containing 
phytobacteria [1,2] and for elimination of microbial con-
taminants in pharmaceutical contents [3]. These plasmas 
that can be used at room temperature and atmospheric 
pressure, and their performances in a liquid medium have 
been convincing. The project therefore aims to develop 
and decline new applications of a non-­thermal plasma in 
order to decontaminate the surfaces of cosmetic products 
(packaging or other) and to evaluate its effect on liquids 
both in terms of conservation of properties and in terms of 
decontamination.
The project involves the development of equipment on a 
pilot scale, associated with the implementation of proto-
cols, in order to evaluate the decontamination efficiency of 
a new pilot equipment on different bacteria and moulds, 
i.e vegetative Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus, 
Bacillus atrophaeus spores and vegetative and sporulated 
Aspergillus brasiliensis.
The development of this plasma pilot, will make it possi-
ble to carry out decontamination efficiency tests with the 
short-­term objective of characterizing the industrial rel-
evance of this technology. Its use on liquid medium form 
will be widely studied because it corresponds to one of the 
major needs expressed by manufacturers.
Keywords: cosmetic product, decontamination, new 
technology, microbial risk, packaging
References: [1] Moreau et al., Lethal effect of the gliding 
arc discharges on Erwinia spp. J. Appl. Microbiol., 2005, 
98:1039–­1046.
[2] Moreau et al. Gliding arc discharge in the potato path-
ogen Erwinia carotovora subsp. Atroseptica: mechanism 
of lethal action and effect on membrane-­associated mol-
ecules. Appl. Env. Microbiol, 2007, 73: 5904–­5910.
[3] Feuilloley et al. Effect of white pulsed-­light on 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa culturability and its endo-
toxin when present in ampoules for injectables. Eur. J. 
Parenteral Pharmacol. Sci., 2006. 11: 9–­15.
MODULATION OF SPIRULINA EXTRACTION 
USING NATURAL DEEP EUTECTIC 
SOLVENTS WITH RESPECT TO PREDICTED 
THERMODYNAMIC PROPERTIES
M. Yagmur1,*; B. Clément-­Larosière2; B. Montigny3; 
J. Jacquemin4; L. Boudesocque-­Delaye1,*
1EA 7502 SIMBA, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université 
deTours, 31 Avenue Monge, 37 200 Tours, France; 2Aqua 
Eco culture, 7 Rue d'Armour Maroué, 22 400 Lamballe, 
France; 3EA 6299 PCM2E, Université de Tours, parc de 
Grandmont, 37 200 Tours, France; 4MSN Department, 
Mohammed VI Polytechnic University, lot 660, Hay 
Moulay Rachid, Ben Guerir 43 150, Morocco
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 58 ===
58  |     
​ABS​TRACT
Objective: Microalgae are a growing interest in the field 
of cosmetics as a natural source of valuable and renewable 
molecules [1]. Among them, chlorophylls, carotenoids or 
free fatty acids (FFA) are high-­values compounds based 
on their anti-­inflammatory, moisturizing and regulating 
properties of the skin microbiota [1]. For this purpose, 
Natural Deep Eutectic Solvents (NaDES) have been stud-
ied herein as a sustainable alternative, therefore numerous 
combinations of NaDES have been tested for investigating 
their biomass extraction potential.
Methods: Thermodynamic property prediction tools, 
such as Conductor-­like Screening Model for Real Solvents 
(COSMO-­RS), are now widely used to prescreen NaDES 
potential candidates prior testing them experimentally. 
During this work, an in silico screening of several NaDES 
combinations with respect to chemicals available in our 
library has been conducted to modulate the non-­polar 
pigments / FFA selectivity during the Spirulina extraction 
process. Indeed, this modulation was conducted based on 
the NaDES, non-­polar pigments and FFA sigma profiles to 
evaluate their potential interactions in solution.
Results: Building on this methodology, non-­polar NaDES 
based on a short chain fatty acid, i.e. octanoic acid (C8), 
were selected as promising candidates for FFA extraction. 
Indeed, C8 is a well-­known compound for such a pur-
pose within the objective to modulate its extraction ability 
when making a NaDES [1]. Thus, the extraction poten-
tial of a NaDES exclusively based on carboxylic acids, 
e.g. C8-­C10, was compared to those obtained when C8 
is associated with rather menthol or 2-­phenoxyethanol. 
Tested NaDES formulations were preselected thanks to 
COSMOthermX solid–­liquid equilibrium (SLE) calcula-
tions to localize their eutectic point. DSC measurements 
of formulated NaDES were then realized to critically eval-
uate COSMOthermX SLE predictions.
Conclusion: During this presentation, the implementa-
tion of this original method will be assessed along with 
experimental results to selectively extract high values 
compounds from Spirulina.
Keywords: COSMO-­RS, green chemistry, microalgae, 
modulation, NaDES, selectivity
Reference: [1] Wils, L., Leman-­Loubière, C., Bellin, 
N., Clément-­Larosière, B., Pinault, M., Chevalier, S., 
Enguehard-­Gueiffier, C., Bodet, C., Boudesocque-­Delaye, 
L., Algal Research, 2021, 56, 102 317.
NEW APPROACH OF ANTI-­OXYDANT CAPACITY 
BY ELECTROCHEMICAL ANALYSIS
A. Creusot; A.-­M. Goncalves; D. Vichard*
Institut Lavoisier de Versailles (ILV), CNRS UMR 8180, 45, 
Avenue des Etats-­Unis, Versailles 78 000, France
Objective: The purpose of this study is to explore a new 
methodology to measure anti-­oxydant capacity of syn-
thetic molecules as well as natural extracts, for some com-
monly used in cosmetic formula.
Methods: The anti-­oxydant capacity of a series of com-
pounds has been determined by DPPH° methodology as 
well as electrochemically speaking, using a microelec-
trode [1]. This one is a very small surface of Pt electrode 
(20 μm) used in electrochemistry. Compared to conven-
tional electrodes, of larger size, the currents measured on 
microelectrode are lower and the thickness of the diffu-
sion layer is also lower, leading to a stationary current. 
By electrochemistry, significant results characterizing the 
anti-­oxydant properties are shown.
Results: All electrochemical measurements were related 
to ferrocene/ferrocenium and showed interesting correla-
tion to DPPH° analysis. This will be discussed with several 
compounds.
Conclusion: Electrochemical analysis of anti-­oxydant 
capacity provides qualitative information that are com-
plementary to DPPH° study. This use of microelectrodes 
could find applications in captors.
Keywords: anti-­oxydant, electrochemical, microelectrode
Reference: [1] A-­M. Gonçalves, C.Mathieu, M. Herlem, 
A. Etcheberry, J. of. Electroanal. Chem., 477 (1) (1999) 
140.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 59 ===
|  59
ABSTR​ACT
ESTIMATION OF MULTIMODAL PARTICLE 
SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS USING MULTIANGLE 
DYNAMIC LIGHT SCATTERING 
MEASUREMENTS AND DEEP LEARNING 
MODELS
M. Jabloun; P. Ravier; D. Pimont
Signal Team, PRISME Laboratory, Orleans University, 12 
rue de Blois, Orleans, France
Objective: The accurate estimation of the size distribu-
tion of nanoparticles and their relative fractions of a mix-
ture serves in the evaluation of their properties. These 
properties are crucial for assessing their benefit and toxic-
ity in a wide range of application fields including aquatic 
and terrestrial environments, cosmetics, medical indus-
tries and human health.
Methods: Estimating the number-­weighted Particle 
Size-­Distribution (PSD) via the inversion of multi-­angle 
dynamic light scattering (MDLS) data is an ill-­posed 
mathematical problem that is very sensitive to noise. The 
present paper compares different machine learning based 
inversions of this ill-­posed problem to estimate the PSD.
Results: When applied to simulated MDLS data, the effi-
ciency and robustness of the deep learning-­based methods 
proposed outperform classical strategies: the estimated 
PSD curves are close to the original PSDs. Moreover, an 
improvement in resolution and repeatability is observed 
when the proposed methods are applied to real MDLS 
data.
Keywords: Particle size distribution PSD, multiangle dy-
namic light scattering MDLS, machine learning networks, 
ill-posed inverse problem
References: [1] M. Naiim, A. Boualem, C. Ferré, M. 
Jabloun, A. Jalocha et P. Ravier., Multiangle dynamic 
light scattering for the improvement of multimodal par-
ticle size distribution measurements, Soft Matter, Royal 
Society of Chemistry, 2015, 11, pp.28–­32. Facteur d'impact 
4.151.
[2] Boualem, M. Jabloun, P. Ravier, M. Naiim, A. Jalocha, 
Cramér-­Rao bounds for particle size distribution estima-
tion from multiangle dynamic light scattering, EUSIPCO, 
Nice 2015: 2221–­2225.
[3] A. Boualem, M. Jabloun, P. Ravier, M. Naiim, A. 
Jalocha, Assessment of two MCMC algorithms con-
vergence for Bayesian estimation of the particle size 
distribution from multiangle dynamic light scattering 
measurements, 34th International Workshop on Bayesian 
Inference and Maximum Entropy MaxEnt, Methods in 
Science and Engineering, September 2014, Amboise, 
France.
[4] A. Boualem, M. Jabloun, P. Ravier, M. Naiim, A. 
Jalocha, A reversible jump MCMC algorithm for Particle 
Size inversion in Multiangle Dynamic Light Scattering, 
22th European Signal Processing COnference EUSIPCO, 
September 2014, Lisbonne, Portugal, pp.1327–­1331.
[CI-­18] A. Boualem, C. Ferre, M. Jabloun, A. Jalocha, M. 
Naiim, P. Ravier, Multiangle dynamic light scattering for the 
improvement of multimodal and polydisperse particle size 
distribution measurements, TechConnect World Innovation 
Conference & Expo, June 2014, Washington, USA.
[5] Z. Ouyang, Philippe Ravier and Meryem Jabloun. Are 
Deep Learning Models Practically Good as Promised? 
A Strategical Comparison of Deep Learning Models for 
Time Series Forecasting. 30th European Signal Processing 
Conference (EUSIPCO 2022), pages -­, Belgrade, Serbia, 
2022.
[6] Z. Ouyang, Philippe Ravier and Meryem Jabloun. A 
Comparison Study of Deep Learning Models Combined 
with Multistep Time Series Forecasting Strategies. 8th 
International conference on Time Series and Forecasting 
ITISE, Gran Canaria, Spain, June 2022.
CLINICAL EFFICACY OF PHOTOPROTECTIVE 
FORMULATIONS CONTAINING OR NOT 
THE ASSOCIATION OF VITAMIN C AND E 
DERIVATIVES
V.T.P. Ferreira1,2; C. Picard2; P. M. B. G. Maia Campos1,*
1School of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, Brazil; 2Unité de Recherche en 
Chimie Organique et Macromoléculaire, Université Le 
Havre Normandie, Normandie univ, URCOM UR 3221, 
F-­76600 Le Havre, France
Objective: This study aimed to evaluate the physicom-
echanical properties and the clinical efficacy of photopro-
tective formulations containing (F2) or not (F1) vitamin 
derivatives as a complementary strategy to photoprotec-
tion and, therefore, to elucidate the extent of its benefits, 
in preventing damage related to the oxidative process.
Methods: Photoprotective formulations, containing or 
not the association of ascorbyl tetraisopalmitate and dl-­
alpha-­tocopherol acetate, were characterized in terms of 
its flow properties and viscoelastic behaviour using the 
Discovery HR-­2 Hybrid Rheometer (TA Instruments). 
Non-­invasive biophysical and skin imaging measure-
ments were performed on 10 healthy research subjects 
to assess skin hydration, using MoistureMap MM100 and 
Corneometer CM825, transepidermal water loss (TEWL) 
-­ Tewameter TM210 and echogenicity and dermal thick-
ness -­ Dermascan C ultrasound [1]. Measurements were 
obtained from the skin of the anterior (non-­photoexposed) 
and posterior (photoexposed) regions of the forearms, be-
fore and after a 28-­day period.
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 60 ===
60  |     
​ABS​TRACT
Results: F1 and F2 exhibited shear thinning and a pre-
dominant elastic behaviour (G' > G”) within the linear 
viscoelastic region [2], with a higher strain value at the 
G'–­ G" crossover and lower values of G' and G" observed 
for F2. Characterization of basal conditions of the fore-
arm skin revealed a significant reduction in dermis 
echogenicity for the posterior region. After 28 days of 
use of both formulations, it was observed significant im-
provements in stratum corneum water content and Grey 
Index, Grey Index T, Mean GL e Mean GL 20 parameters 
of MoistureMap. For F2, a subtle improvement in the 
Corner Density parameter, related to density of primary 
lines [3], was observed as well as an increase of higher 
magnitude in dermis echogenicity ratio, both in photo-
exposed skin regions.
Conclusion: F2 showed a more sustained elastic behav-
iour and higher resistance to imposed oscillatory strain. 
Comparative evaluation of basal conditions verified a sig-
nificantly lower dermal density for the photoexposed skin, 
related to photoaging. Both photoprotective formulations 
were effective increasing skin hydration and dermis echo-
genicity in both evaluated regions. The formulation con-
taining vitamins derivatives showed an improvement in 
density of primary lines, as higher values of the Corner 
Density parameter are correlated with younger ages and 
lower levels of photoexposure.
Keywords: clinical efficacy, dermis echogenicity, physi-
comechanical properties, skin photoaging
References: [1] Infante V.H., Maia Campos P.M.B.G., 
Darvin M., Lohan S., Schleusener J., Schanzer S., 
Lademann J., Meinke M. Photochemistry and Photobiology. 
2022, 10.1111/php.13713.
[2] Gilbert L., Picard C., Savary G., Grisel M. Rheological 
and textural characterization of cosmetic emulsions con-
taining natural and synthetic polymers: relationships be-
tween both data. Colloids Surf, A Physicochem Eng Asp, 
2013, 421: 150–­163.
[3] Bazin R., Laquieze S., Rosillo A., Luc Leveque J. Skin 
Research and Technology, 2010, 16: 23–­29.
SKIN ABSORPTION OF PHENOXYETHANOL 
FROM BABY WIPE PRODUCTS
A. Rahma1,2,*; M. E. Lane2
1School of pharmacy, Institut Teknologi Bandung, Ganesa 
10, Bandung 40 132, Indonesia; 2School of Pharmacy, 
University College London, 29–­39 Brunswick Square, 
London WC1N 1AX, UK
Objective: In the infant population, there is regular use 
of diapers and cleansing wipes. The skin covered by a dia-
per isclearlyan occluded environmentand this may result 
inover-­hydration of skin. Considering that the practice of 
wiping the diaper area is carried out regularly, there is-
repeated exposure of the skin to ingredients contained in 
baby wipes. To date there has been no published informa-
tion regarding dermal absorption of ingredients contained 
in these products. Several baby wipe formulations contain 
2-­phenoxyethanol (PE) as a preservative and cetylpyri-
dinium chloride (CPC) as a surfactant with antimicrobial 
activity. However, information regarding skin absorption 
of PE in the presence of CPCin the scientific literature is 
limited. The objectives of the present study were (1) to de-
termine the concentrations of PE and CPC contained in 
the lotion extracted from baby wipe products and (2) to 
investigate the in vitro permeation profiles of PE from the 
lotion formulations in human skin.
Methods: Three commercial baby wipe products con-
taining PE and CPC were obtained, namely Cussons 
Baby Wipes Pure & Gentle (Cussons), Paseo Baby Wipes 
(Paseo), and Pigeon Baby Wipes (Pigeon). The amounts of 
lotion contained in the baby wipes were determined gravi-
metrically. Subsequently, PE amounts in the baby wipes 
were determined by extracting the wipes with methanol 
under constant stirring for 24 h, followed by sonication for 
15 min. The wipe fabric material was then dried for 72 h at 
room temperature and weighed. The lotion contained in 
the baby wipes was extracted for further studies by using 
manual pressure for 1 min and the amounts of PE in the 
lotion were determined by using HPLC. In vitro permea-
tion studies were conducted for all the PE-­containing lo-
tion formulations in human skin for 24 h under finite dose 
conditions.
Results: The amounts of lotion contained in the 
Cussons, Paseo, and Pigeon products were deter-
mined as 1.96 ± 0.03, 3.10 ± 0.06, and 2.61 ± 0.15 g per 
g of dry fabric, respectively. The amounts of PE con-
tained in the lotion for the Cussons, Paseo, and Pigeon 
products were determined as 1.49 ± 0.01, 0.67 ± 0.01, 
and 2.85 ± 0.03 mg/mL, respectively. The cumula-
tive amounts of PE which permeated at 24 h for the 
Cussons, Paseo, and Pigeon products were 12.25 ± 0.44, 
6.15 ± 0.13, and 23.97 ± 1.02 μg, respectively.
Conclusion: This is the first study to report the amounts 
of PE that permeate in vitro in human skin from the lo-
tion contained in commercial baby wipes. The findings 
indicate that more than 80% of PE permeated from the ap-
plied dose of lotion. It is important to note that the in vitro 
model employed in this work does not reflect actual in-­use 
conditions for these products. Future studies will focus on 
development of models that better replicate the short con-
tact time of these formulations with the skin.
Keywords: diaper area, human skin, infants, permeation, 
preservative, skin care
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

=== Page 61 ===
|  61
ABSTR​ACT
SURFACTANT-­FREE EMULSIONS STABILIZED 
BY HIGH-­FREQUENCY ULTRA-­SONICATION: 
BIOEQUIVALENCE TESTS OF CAFFEINE AND 
Α-­TOCOPHEROL DELIVERY TO HUMAN SKIN
H. Kichou1; A. C. Caritá1; G. Gillet2; L. Bougassaaa; 
X. Perse1; M. Soucé1; L. Gressin2; I. Chourpa1; 
E. Munnier1,*
1Université de Tours, Faculté de Pharmacie, EA6295 
NMNS, France; 2GENIALIS, Route d'Achères, 
Henrichemont 18 250, France
Objective: While customers are increasingly seeking safe 
and environmentally friendly cosmetic products, simplify-
ing formulas by removing ingredients issued from chemical 
synthesis is an interesting approach to strengthen the nat-
urality of final products. High Frequency Ultrasonication 
Technology (HFUT) is a physical process enabling the 
stabilization of emulsions without requiring additional 
ingredients such as emulsifying surfactants (ES). In this 
work, the formulation characteristics and performances 
of ES-­free and HFUT-­treated emulsions were compared 
to those of a standard emulsion stabilized by a couple of 
ES. Two active molecules of very different polarities were 
used: caffeine and α-­tocopherol.
Methods: These two types of emulsions were compared 
in terms of droplet size, viscosity, pH, and rheological be-
haviour for both active ingredients. The permeation of caf-
feine and the skin retention of α-­tocopherol were studied 
in vitro using Franz diffusion cells on human skin biop-
sies, considered the gold standard for permeation assays.
Results: The formulations developed were stable over 
1 month and showed shear thinning behaviours. Unlike 
for standard emulsions, the ES-­free emulsions droplet size 
were similar and inferior to 1.5 μm regardless of the phase 
in which the active was introduced. In the case of caffeine 
(highly hydrophilic), the ES-­free emulsion showed a de-
livery capacity similar to that of the standard emulsion. 
However, differences were observed in the distribution of 
α-­tocopherol (highly lipophilic) in the first cell layers of 
the stratum corneum with a slight advantage for the stand-
ard emulsion, probably due to the impact of surfactants 
on the SC lipids.
Conclusion: This work demonstrates that HFUT is a 
reliable tool to prepare stable emulsions without the ad-
dition of emulsifying surfactant. Skin permeation stud-
ies confirm that HFUT-­stabilized emulsions promote 
the delivery of both hydrophilic and lipophilic actives 
to the human skin. The slightly lower penetration of α-­
tocopherol ES-­free emulsion highlights the current chal-
lenge of the cosmetic industry: combining naturalness 
and efficacy.
Keywords: caffeine, high frequency ultrasonication tech-
nology, human skin, permeation test, surfactant-­free for-
mulations, α-­tocopherol
Acknowledgments: Région Centre-­Val de Loire for fi-
nancial support.
References: [1] H. Kichou et al. Highlighting the ef-
ficiency of ultrasound-­based emulsifier free emulsions 
to penetrate reconstructed human skin by HPLC. Int J 
Cosmet Sci, 2022, 44 (2): 262–­270.
[2] H. Kichou et al. The efficiency of emulsifier-­free emul-
sions in delivering caffeine and α-­tocopherol to human 
skin. Int J Cosmet Sci, 2023, DOI: 10.1111/ics.12837
 14682494, 2023, S2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ics.12921 by Morocco Hinari NPL, Wiley Online Library on [08/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

