=== Page 1 ===
[ O c t o b e r 2 0 1 5 • V o l u m e 8 • N u m b e r 1 0 ]
21
21
[ O R I G I N A L R E S E A R C H ]
DISCLOSURE: Dr. Katz is a paid independent research consultant for US Cosmeceutechs, LLC. Joseph Lewis and Laura McHugh are employees of
US Cosmeceutechs, LLC, owner of pending patents for technologies used in this study. Arthur Pellegrino and Lativia Popescu are employed by
Elizabeth Arden, Inc., an investor in US CosmeceuTechs, LLC.
ADDRESS CORRESPONDENCE TO: Bruce Katz, MD; E-mail: brukatz@gmail.com 
The Tolerability and Efficacy of a 
Three-product Anti-aging Treatment
Regimen in Subjects with 
Moderate-to-severe Photodamage
aBRUCE E. KATZ, MD; bJOSEPH LEWIS, BS; bLAURA McHUGH, MS; 
cARTHUR PELLEGRINO, BS; cLAVINIA POPESCU, MS, MBA
aClinical Professor, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; bUS Cosmeceutechs, LLC; cElizabeth Arden, Inc.
P
hotodamage is characterized by a variety of aspects
that, as a whole, show themselves as accelerated
aging of the skin. Fine lines and wrinkles, dyschromia,
flakiness, leathery appearance, sallow complexion, and
other changes in tone and texture of skin are common.1 At
the cellular level, photodamage is characterized2 by irregular
thickening of the stratum corneum, thinning epidermis,
reduced levels of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) resulting in
decreased moisture retention in the epidermis and dermis,
reduced and fragmented collagen and elastin, collapsed
fibroblasts, and reduced basal cell division. The causes are
theorized to be the result of extrinsic stress from ultraviolet
(UV) radiation and other sources of environmentally
induced reactive oxygen species (ROS, or free radicals, e.g.,
infrared radiation, ozone, pollution)3–4 as compared to
intrinsic oxidative stress causing normal aging of skin.
Topical treatment is an ideal frontline therapeutic choice for
many patients, especially those suffering from mild-to-
moderate photodamage, because of the simplicity and
relatively low associated cost, staving off the need for more
powerful device-based options. More severe photodamage is
resistant to treatment via topical formulation due to issues
of tolerability when using actives at therapeutically relevant
strengths. 
ABSTRACT
Retinoids and alpha hydroxy acids differ in mechanism of action for treatment of photodamage, but concurrent use may
produce a synergistic effect by combining retinoid-induced normalization of cellular differentiation with alpha hydroxy acid-
induced exfoliation (in hydrophilic areas) and enhanced dermal and epidermal hydration. A recent bioengineered molecule,
ethyl lactyl retinoate (alpha hydroxy acid retinoid conjugate), is the first to deliver alpha hydroxy acids and retinoids
together in a hydrolysis-based time-released fashion. This could improve efficacy while minimizing irritation commonly
associated with retinoid use. An eight-week clinical study was conducted to examine the efficacy and tolerability of this
formulation; 25 women aged 54.1±8.9 years (mean ± SD) with moderate-to-severe photodamage (as determined by
physician investigators using the Glogau Wrinkle Scale) employed a twice-daily regimen of cleanser (7.8% l-lactic acid, 2%
salicylic acid) and anti-aging serum (0.1% alpha hydroxy acids-retinoids, 6.5% l-lactic acid) with concurrent use of sun
protection factor 50+ sunscreen as needed. Longitudinal analysis of study data revealed statistically significant
improvement in photodamage, dryness/flaking, dyschromia, and global appearance at eight weeks. All study products were
well-tolerated throughout. Investigators concluded that the alpha hydroxy acid retinoid conjugate is a safe and effective
topical therapy for moderate-to-severe photodamage, warranting further study. (clinicaltrials.gov, NCT02422836,
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02422836?term=NCT02422836) (J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2015;8(10):21–26.)

=== Page 2 ===
[ O c t o b e r 2 0 1 5 • V o l u m e 8 • N u m b e r 1 0 ]
22
22
22
Although heavily studied, retinoids (RC; vitamin A and
its derivatives) are not well-understood, seeming to have an
inexplicably wide variety of biological effects, including
immunomodulation, 
increased 
collagen 
production,
regulation of skin cell metabolism and cellular turnover,
thickening of the epidermis, an increase in the height of rete
ridges and the number of dermal papillae, normalization of
melanocyte function, and an increase in dermal fibroblast
production and activity.5–8 They have been vigorously
investigated for the treatment of photodamage and though
often harnessed for dermatologic use, associated skin
irritation limits their utility as a topical somewhat, and a
variety of strategies have been employed to mitigate
irritation and maximize adherence.9
Alpha hydroxy acids (AHA) are nontoxic fruit- or food-
based organic acids (e.g., glycolic acid, lactic acid, malic
acid, etc.); lactic acid is a natural component of human body
tissue.10 Chemically, AHAs consist of a carboxylic acid
functional group with a hydroxyl group (alcohol) on the
adjacent (alpha) carbon atom. Used for skin moisturization
and exfoliation of dead skin cells, AHAs have been applied
for a variety of dermatologic indications involving abnormal
keratinization, including dry skin, dandruff, wrinkles, and
acne among others. Clinical research has demonstrated
their mechanism of action primarily involving reduced
corneocyte cohesion (exfoliation) and upregulation of
dermal 
and 
epidermal 
hyaluronan 
production
(moisturization) with subsequent visual improvements in
skin texture, tone, and radiance without inflammation when
properly formulated.10–16 These factors make AHA ideal for
dermatologic applications.17
Therapeutic doses of topically applied retinoids
frequently cause skin irritations that interfere with
treatment. Figure 1 shows the relationship between
commonly used retinoids and retinoic acid and the general
irritation level and the process by which they are converted
from one form to another via oxidation or hydrolysis. Esters
are molecules made by joining an organic carboxylic acid
with an alcohol through a condensation reaction; these
typically provide increased stability and reduced irritation
versus the parent compounds. Attempts to reduce retinoid
irritation by esterifying vitamin A with fatty acids or other
common organic acids, such as palmitic acid or acetic acid
to produce retinyl esters (e.g., retinyl palmitate and retinyl
acetate) negatively impact efficacy and thus, therapeutic
potential. Chemically, AHAs are both carboxylic acids and
alcohols, but reactions where AHAs are reacted as
“alcohols” are uncommon. Retinoate esters of vitamin A can
be made by combining AHA (as the alcohol) with vitamin A
acid. 
A novel retinoid ester may provide a topical alternative
for moderate-to-severe cases of photodamage. This
bioengineered molecule, known as ethyl lactyl retinoate
(AHA retinoid conjugate, or AHA-RC), is the first double
conjugate retinoid to deliver both AHA and RC to skin on a
hydrolysis-based time-released mechanism biologically
designed to maximize efficiency and minimize potential
irritation from the retinoid component. The molecular
structure for AHA-RC is shown in Figure 2. Conjugation of
AHA with the larger, more lipophilic retinoid and again with
ethanol improves deliverability of the resulting compound.
Theoretically, such a molecule would exhibit the beneficial
properties of both AHA and RC while minimizing RC-
associated irritation, thereby providing an effective, yet
gentler, topical therapy for photodamage that may be
effective for moderate-to-severe cases otherwise resistant
to treatment with topical sera.
The purpose of this eight-week, full-face clinical study
was to evaluate efficacy and tolerability of a twice-daily,
three product, skin care regimen using a bioengineered
AHA retinoid conjugate ester in patients with moderate-to-
severe photodamage.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Subjects. Women (n=25) aged 54.1±8.9 years (mean ±
SD, 
age 
range 
36–65) 
with 
moderate-to-severe
lines/wrinkles (grade 3 or higher on the Glogau Scale, as
shown in Figure 3) were enrolled in the study. Exclusion
criteria included hypersensitivity to constituents of any of
the study products; concurrent use of any topical or oral
medication or therapy deemed by the investigator as
potentially interfering with the study; use of anti-aging
skincare products (cosmetic and drug products with AHA,
salicylic acid, vitamin A, retin-A, vitamin C, growth factors
or peptides, antioxidants such as idebenone, coffeeberry
extract, CE ferulic, or phloretin) within the previous three
Figure 1. Vitamin A derivatives, method of conversion and irritation
potential 
Figure 2. Molecular diagram of AHA retinoid conjugate (AHA-RC).

=== Page 3 ===
[ O c t o b e r 2 0 1 5 • V o l u m e 8 • N u m b e r 1 0 ]
23
23
months and during the course of the study; use of medical
treatments for the skin for anti-aging (such as laser,
chemical peels, microdermabrasion, or other therapies)
within six months prior to or during the study period;
pregnancy or breastfeeding during the study period; lack of
willingness to avoid prolonged exposure to sunlight,
sunlamps, or tanning beds; participation in another study
concurrently or within 30 days of enrollment; and presence
of any condition or disorder (dermatologic or otherwise),
which the investigator decided may interfere with
successful participation in the study or accurate evaluation
of endpoints. The study was conducted under current Good
Clinical Practices guidelines using an independent
investigational review board-approved protocol.
Procedure. The study was conducted at the JUVA Skin
& Laser Center/MediSpa (New York, New York) between
February 2013 and May 2013. After an initial screening visit
(Days -10 to -7) during which informed consent, medical
history, inclusion/exclusion criteria review, initial endpoint
assessment, and other pre-screening activities were
performed, enrolled subjects were instructed to discontinue
use of any and all facial products except dry mineral
foundation and eye makeup for 7 to 10 days prior to
beginning the study (“washout” period). A baseline (Day 0)
pre-screening was reviewed, baseline endpoint evaluations
were performed, baseline digital photographs were taken,
and product was dispensed with clear instructions as to
study guidelines and product use protocol.
The three-product regimen included cream skin cleanser
(7.8% l-lactic acid, 2% salicylic acid), anti-aging serum
(0.1% AHA-RC, 6.5% l-lactic acid), and sunscreen SPF 50+.
Subjects were instructed to apply anti-aging serum after
use of cream skin cleanser in the morning and evening.
Sunscreen SPF 50+ was to be applied after morning
application of anti-aging serum. For cleansing, study
participants applied a small amount of product to be gently
lathered and massaged over the face, followed by thorough
water rinse and patting dry. Anti-aging serum was pumped
(one or two pumps as needed) into the hands and
thoroughly massaged into the face, neck, and décolletage.
Liberal application of sunscreen SPF 50+ was expected 15
minutes prior to sun exposure and to be reapplied as
needed. Subject diaries were included to promote
adherence and obtain subject commentary or observations.
Subjects were also instructed to notify the investigator
immediately in the case of intolerable irritation or other
adverse events within 48 hours of discovery.
At the Week 4 (Day 28) visit, subject diaries were
collected (with new ones dispensed), digital photography
and visual expert grading of endpoints were performed, and
adverse events were recorded along with any concomitant
medication information. At Week 8 (Day 56), subject diaries
and remaining product were collected, digital photography
and visual expert grading of endpoints was performed, and
adverse events were recorded along with any concomitant
medication information.
Physician evaluation and photography. Digital
photography and evaluation of clinical endpoints was
implemented at baseline as well as Weeks 4 and 8 of the
study period. Dryness/Flaking, Dyschromia, Stinging/
Burning, and Erythema/Redness were evaluated by the
investigator on a 0 to 5 scale (0=none, 1=minimal, 2=mild,
3=moderate, 4=moderately severe, 5=severe). Improvement
in dyschromia was measured at Week 8 only. Global
improvement was measured on a 0 to 4 scale (0=no
improvement, 1=minimal improvement, 2=mild improvement,
3=moderate improvement, 4=marked improvement).
Photographs were taken using the Canfield VISIA digital
imaging system (Canfield Imaging Systems, Fairfield, New
Jersey) with the camera mounted on a stereotactic head
positioning device. Images were captured from three angles
(full front at 0°, from left at 45°, and from right at -45°) at
controlled distances under standard room lighting.
Photographs were taken 20 minutes after onsite facial
cleansing with no makeup or jewelry allowed.
Data analysis. The primary clinical endpoint was the
change between photodamage grade (using the Glogau
Scale) at the Week 4 visit and Week 8 visit versus the grade
evaluation at the baseline visit (Day 0). Similar comparison
was made for other clinical endpoints (Dryness/Flaking,
Dyschromia, Stinging/Burning, and Erythema/Redness) as
well. Aggregate data were analyzed via Mann-Whitney test
using the cutoff of p<0.05. Subject reports of tolerability
Glogau Photodamage Scale
TYPE I: No Wrinkles
Minimal to no discoloraion or wrinkling
No keratoses
TYPE II: Wrinkles in Motion
Wrinkling in skin with movement
Slight lines near the mouth and eyes
No keratoses 
TYPE III: Wrinkles at Rest
Visible wrinkles all the time
Noticeable discolorations
Visible keratoses
TYPE IV: Only Wrinkles
Wrinkles throughout (make-up appears to cake and crack when
applied)
Grey or yellow discoloration of the skin
History of prior skin cancer
Figure 3. Glogau Photodamage Scale

=== Page 4 ===
[ O c t o b e r 2 0 1 5 • V o l u m e 8 • N u m b e r 1 0 ]
24
24
and efficacy were also recorded via post-study subject self-
assessment questionnaire conducted at final Week 8 follow-
up, with results tallied as percentages.
RESULTS
All subjects completed the study. No adverse events or
tolerability issues were reported.
Physician evaluation. The Mann-Whitney test was
used to analyze aggregate data with a cutoff of p<0.05.
Percentages of subjects demonstrating grades of
improvement for clinical endpoints at Weeks 4 and 8 are
shown in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. 
Improvement in fine lines and wrinkles did not manifest
significantly by Week 4, but advanced to statistically
significant levels by Week 8. There were also apparent
reductions in level of improvement between Weeks 4 and 8
in dryness (55.8 vs. 46.51%, respectively) and erythema
(84.21 vs. 52.63%, respectively). Stinging was improved
slightly more at Week 8 than Week 4, but was highly
improved on both cases. Before and after (baseline and
Week 8, respectively) photographs of subject improvement
are given in Figures 4 and 5.
Percentage improvements at Week 8 with
the endpoint showing the greatest improve-
ment listed first are Stinging, Dyschromia,
Erythema, Dryness, and Photodamage. Global
improvement at Week 8 was 72.8 percent and
was statistically significant (p<0.001). Some
key results are graphically demonstrated in
Figure 6.
DISCUSSION
While 
photodamage 
in 
its 
various
manifestations can be more aggressively
treated with device-based modalities including
ablative and nonablative lasers (fractional or
nonfractional), microdermabrasion, intense
pulsed 
light 
(IPL) 
with 
or 
without
photodynamic therapy (PDT), and other
energy-based methods, topical treatment is an
excellent early intervention.1 Younger or less
photodamaged patients may be averse to or
simply not require aggressive therapy;
treatment is relatively inexpensive and can be
performed in the convenience of one’s home;
risk is minimal with topical treatment in
comparison to device-based modalities. Other
advantages of topical therapy include lack of
need for downtime or any type of recovery
period and ease of use. Physicians can easily
prescribe therapy rather than expend office
time (theirs or that of ancillary staff)
performing treatments. One major dis-
advantage to topical remedies is the need for
strict adhrence because they require daily use.
Patients may become bored with therapy,
impatient with slower onset of results, or—as
happens with less tolerable therapies—
become discouraged and discontinue regular use due to
discomfort or other issues.
Both AHA and RC have been applied as less aggressive
topicals for treatment of photodamage, but individual utility
is limited. The effect of AHA is limited to exfoliation and
moisturization, and more aggressive concentrations of RC
topicals cause irritation. By combining the two in a novel
formulation, synergistic improvements in tolerability and
efficacy are hypothesized. The novel bioengineered
molecule is believed to facilitate delivery of the RC and
mitigate potential irritation. Because the AHA component
(lactic acid) of the molecule is limited in concentration due
to the conjugated retinoid, additional AHA concentration is
supplemented in the formulation to increase overall AHA to
6.5%. Combining effective concentrations of AHA and RC is
useful for photodamage and extends the utility of topical
therapies, perhaps allowing users to avoid or temporarily
offset the need for inconvenient and relatively costly
device-based alternatives.
The outcomes revealed in this clinical study do indeed
demonstrate improvement in photodamage and tolerability
TABLE 1. Percent change from baseline to Week 4
PHOTODAMAGE‡
DRYNESS
STINGING
ERYTHEMA
Change (%)
1.32
55.80
71.43
84.21
p value*†
0.322
<0.001
0.002
<0.001
NS 
S
S
S
*Statistical significance was defined as p<0.05
†NS=not statistically significant, S=statistically significant
‡as measured using the Glogau Scale
TABLE 2. Percent change from baseline to Week 8
PHOTODAMAGE‡ DRYNESS DYSCHROMIA STINGING
ERYTHEMA
Change
(%)
17.11
46.51
56.52
76.19
52.63
p value*†
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
S
S
S
S
S
*Statistical significance was defined as p<0.05
†NS=not statistically significant, S=statistically significant
‡as measured using the Glogau Scale

=== Page 5 ===
[ O c t o b e r 2 0 1 5 • V o l u m e 8 • N u m b e r 1 0 ]
25
of the treatment regimen. While improvement in fine lines
and wrinkles (measured by the Glogau Scale) was less
dramatic, not significantly manifesting until after
assessment at Week 4, there were obvious and significant
improvements in all other criteria across the board at both
Week 4 and 8 follow-up visits. This may encourage
adherence by providing noticeable results to patients
without discomfort that might inhibit enthusiasm. Stinging
sensation 
showed 
the 
strongest 
improvement,
strengthening any suggestion of tolerability. It is also
notable that the subject population consisted of those
presenting with moderate-to-severe photodamage; this is
somewhat profound given the topical nature of the
investigated therapy.
To summarize, this study demonstrates the potential
utility of this novel AHA-RC molecule when applied
regularly as a treatment for photodamage. Study outcomes
include significant improvement across all evaluated criteria
and thus suggest that additional study, including vehicle
controls, larger and more diverse study population, and
extended study time period might more firmly delineate the
Figure 4. Before (baseline, at left) and after (at week 8 follow-up, right) photographs showing improvement in wrinkling at the right periorbital
region of a Caucasian, non-Hispanic woman (age 52 years).
Figure 5. Before (baseline, at left) and after (at week 8 follow-up, right) photographs showing improvement in dyschromia at the upper face of
a Caucasian, non-Hispanic woman (age 64 years).
Figure 6. Photodamage treatment results; percent improvement in
photodamage parameters

=== Page 6 ===
[ O c t o b e r 2 0 1 5 • V o l u m e 8 • N u m b e r 1 0 ]
26
actual duration of effect and ceiling of improvement.
Specific focus of endpoint criteria designed for more
thorough analysis may also be more revealing; further
investigation would also provide additional proof of safety
and tolerability.
CONCLUSION
The three product regimen used in this study was shown
to be safe and effective for treatment of moderate-to-severe
photodamage with statistically significant levels of
correction exhibited for all clinical endpoints by Week 8
follow-up (study conclusion). Additional controlled study
with larger, more diverse populations would further reveal
the utility of this novel retinoid ester.
REFERENCES
1. 
Visscher MO, Pan BS, Kitzmiller WJ. Photodamage:
treatments and topicals for facial skin. Facial Plast Surg
Clin North Am. 2013;21(1):61–75.
2.
Rubin MG. Photoaged and photodamaged skin. In: Manual of
Chemical Peels: Superficial and Medium Depth.
Philadelphia, Pa: JB lippincott Co; 1995:1–2.
3.
Pinnell SR. Photodamage and oxidative stress and protection
provided by topical antioxidants. J Am Acad Dermatol.
2003;48(1):1–19.
4.
Lewis JA II, DiNardo JC, McDaniel DH. Oxidative stress, the
damage-accumulation theory of skin aging, and the role of
antioxidants in the future of topical skin protection. Cosmet
Dermatol. 2009;22(11):576–582.
5.
Kligman AM, Grove GL, Hirose R, Leyden JJ. Topical tretinoin
for photoaged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;15(4 Pt
2):836–859.
6.
Kang S. Photoaging and tretinoin. Clin Dermatol.
1998;16(2):357–364.
7.
Kligman LH. Topical retinoic acid enhances repair of
ultraviolet damaged dermal connective tissue. Connect
Tissue Res. 1984;12(2):139–150.
8.
Zelickson AS, Mortaz JH, Weiss JS, et al. Topical tretinoin in
photoaging: an ultrastructural study. J Cutan Aging Cosmet
Dermatol. 1988;1:41–47.
9.
Rolewski SL. Clinical review: topical retinoids. Dermatol
Nurs. 2003;15(5):447–450,459–465.
10.
Yu RJ, Van Scott E. Alpha-hydroxy acids: science and
therapeutic use. Cosmet Dermatol. 1994;7(10S):12–20. 
11.
Berardesca E, Maibach H. AHA mechanism of action.
Cosmetics and Toiletries Magazine. 1995;110:30–31.
12.
Neudecker BA, Stern R. Alpha hydroxy acids stimulate
hyaluronan deposition: an in-vitro study using human dermal
fibroblasts. J Drugs Dermatol. Pre-publication draft dated
Nov 2014.
13.
Bernstein EF, Lee J, Brown DB, et al. Glycolic acid treatment
increases type I collagen mRNA and hyaluronic acid content
of human skin. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27(5):429–433.
14.
Johnson AW, Nole GE, Rozen MG, et al. Skin tolerance of
AHAs: a comparison of lactic and glycolic acids and the role
of pH. Cosmet Dermatol. 1997;10(2):38–45.
15.
Van Scott E, Yu RJ. Hyperkeratinization, corneocyte
cohesion, and alpha hydroxyl acids. J Am Acad Dermatol.
1984:11:867–879.
16.
DiNardo JC, Grove GL, Moy LS. Clinical and histological
effects of glycolic acid at different concentrations and pH
levels. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22(5):421–424.
17.
Van Scott E, Yu RJ. Alpha hydroxyacids: therapeutic
potentials. Can J Dermatol. 1989,1(5):108–112.

